emrQA: A Large Corpus for Question Answering on
Electronic Medical Records
Anusri Pampari∗ Preethi Raghavan†¨ Jennifer Liang† and Jian Peng∗‡
¨
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, Cambridge, MA
†
IBM TJ Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY
∗
Dept. of Computer Science, University of Illinois Urbana Champaign, IL
‡
Carle Illinois College of Medicine, University of Illinois Urbana Champaign, IL
∗
{pampari2,jianpeng}@illinois.edu † {praghav,jjliang}@us.ibm.com

arXiv:1809.00732v1 [cs.CL] 3 Sep 2018

Abstract
We propose a novel methodology to generate
domain-specific large-scale question answering (QA) datasets by re-purposing existing annotations for other NLP tasks. We demonstrate
an instance of this methodology in generating
a large-scale QA dataset for electronic medical
records by leveraging existing expert annotations on clinical notes for various NLP tasks
from the community shared i2b2 datasets§ .
The resulting corpus (emrQA) has 1 million
question-logical form and 400,000+ questionanswer evidence pairs. We characterize the
dataset and explore its learning potential by
training baseline models for question to logical form and question to answer mapping.

1

Introduction

Automatic question answering (QA) has made
big strides with several open-domain and machine
comprehension systems built using large-scale annotated datasets (Voorhees et al., 1999; Ferrucci
et al., 2010; Rajpurkar et al., 2016; Joshi et al.,
2017). However, in the clinical domain this problem remains relatively unexplored. Physicians frequently seek answers to questions from unstructured electronic medical records (EMRs) to support clinical decision-making (Demner-Fushman
et al., 2009). But in a significant majority of cases,
they are unable to unearth the information they
want from EMRs (Tang et al., 1994). Moreover
to date, there is no general system for answering
natural language questions asked by physicians on
a patient’s EMR (Figure 1) due to lack of largescale datasets (Raghavan and Patwardhan, 2016).
EMRs are a longitudinal record of a patient’s
health information in the form of unstructured
clinical notes (progress notes, discharge summaries etc.) and structured vocabularies. Physi§

∗
Part of this work was done during an internship at IBM
https://www.i2b2.org/NLP/DataSets/

Record Date: 08/09/98
08/31/96 ascending aortic root replacement with homograft
with omentopexy. The patient continued to be hemodynamically stable making good progress. Physical examination:
BMI: 33.4 Obese, high risk. Pulse: 60. resp. rate: 18
Question: Has the patient ever had an abnormal BMI?
Answer: BMI: 33.4 Obese, high risk
Question: When did the patient last receive a homograft
replacement ?
Answer: 08/31/96 ascending aortic root replacement with
homograft with omentopexy.

Figure 1: Question-Answer pairs from emrQA clinical note.

cians wish to answer questions about medical entities and relations from the EMR, requiring a
deeper understanding of clinical notes. While
this may be likened to machine comprehension,
the longitudinal nature of clinical discourse, little to no redundancy in facts, abundant use of
domain-specific terminology, temporal narratives
with multiple related diseases, symptoms, medications that go back and forth in time, and misspellings, make it complex and difficult to apply existing NLP tools (Demner-Fushman et al.,
2009; Raghavan and Patwardhan, 2016). Moreover, answers may be implicit or explicit and may
require domain-knowledge and reasoning across
clinical notes. Thus, building a credible QA system for patient-specific EMR QA requires largescale question and answer annotations that sufficiently capture the challenging nature of clinical
narratives in the EMR. However, serious privacy
concerns about sharing personal health information (Devereaux, 2013; Krumholz et al., 2016),
and the tedious nature of assimilating answer annotations from across longitudinal clinical notes,
makes this task impractical and possibly erroneous
to do manually (Lee et al., 2017).
In this work, we address the lack of any publicly available EMR QA corpus by creating a
large-scale dataset, emrQA, using a novel gener-

Ontology/Schema
Representation of
Data

Question
Collection

Question
Question
Question
Template
Question
Template
Question
Template
Question
Template
Question
Template
Template
Template

Normalization

Logical Form
Annotation

Patient 2
Year 2012
---------------------------Patient
1
Year 2015

Question
Question
Question
Template
Question
Template
Question
Template
Coreference
Template
Template
Template
Medication

Question
Question
Question
Template
Question
Template
Question
Template
Question
Template
Logical
Form
Template
Template
Template

i2b2

I2b2 dataset

Patient-----…….
1
Year 2014
Patient
1
Year 2013
………………………………..
nitroglycerin 40 mg daily ,
evening. The patient
………………………………………
………………………………………
..

Clinical Notes
What is the dosage of |medication| ?
Entity Placeholder
Entity type: medication

MedicationEvent (|medication|) [dosage=x] <Medication = Nitroglycerin
dosage = 40mg >
Answer Entity
Question Entity Placeholder

Electronic Medical Record

Entity type = dosage

What is the dosage of Nitroglycerin ?

MedicationEvent (Nitroglycerin) [dosage=x]

Answer = 40mg, Evidence = Nitroglycerin 40 mg daily, evening

Figure 2: Our QA dataset generation framework using existing i2b2 annotations on a given patient’s record to generate a
question, its logical form and answer evidence. The highlights in the figure show the annotations being used for this example.

ation framework that allows for minimal expert
involvement and re-purposes existing annotations
available for other clinical NLP tasks (i2b2 challenge datasets (Guo et al., 2006)). The annotations serve as a proxy-expert in generating questions, answers, and logical forms. Logical forms
provide a human-comprehensible symbolic representation, linking questions to answers, and help
build interpretable models, critical to the medical
domain (Davis et al., 1977; Vellido et al., 2012).
We analyze the emrQA dataset in terms of question complexity, relations, and the reasoning required to answer questions, and provide neural and
heuristic baselines for learning to predict questionlogical forms and question-answers.
The main contributions of this work are as follows:
• A novel framework for systematic generation
of domain-specific large-scale QA datasets
that can be used in any domain where manual
annotations are challenging to obtain but limited annotations may be available for other
NLP tasks.
• The first accessible patient-specific EMR
QA dataset, emrQA∗ , consisting of 400,000
question-answer pairs and 1 million questionlogical form pairs. The logical forms will
allow users to train and benchmark interpretable models that justify answers with corresponding logical forms.
• Two new reasoning challenges, namely arithmetic and temporal reasoning, that are absent
in open-domain datasets like SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2016).
∗

https://github.com/panushri25/emrQA, scripts to generate emrQA from i2b2 data. i2b2 data is accessible by everyone subject to a license agreement.

2

Related Work

Question Answering (QA) datasets are classified
into two main categories: (1) machine comprehension (MC) using unstructured documents, and (2)
QA using Knowledge Bases (KBs).
MC systems aim to answer any question that
could be posed against a reference text. Recent
advances in crowd-sourcing and search engines
have resulted in an explosion of large-scale (100K)
MC datasets for factoid QA, having ample redundant evidence in text (Rajpurkar et al., 2016;
Trischler et al., 2016; Joshi et al., 2017; Dhingra
et al., 2017). On the other hand, complex domainspecific MC datasets such as MCTest (Richardson
et al., 2013), biological process modeling (Berant
et al., 2014), BioASQ (Tsatsaronis et al., 2015),
InsuranceQA (Feng et al., 2015), etc have been
limited in scale (500-10K) because of the complexity of the task or the need for expert annotations that cannot be crowd-sourced or gathered
from the web. In contrast to the open-domain,
EMR data cannot be released publicly due to privacy concerns (Šuster et al., 2017). Also, annotating unstructured EMRs requires a medical expert who can understand and interpret clinical text.
Thus, very few datasets like i2b2, MIMIC (Johnson et al., 2016) (developed over several years in
collaboration with large medical groups and hospitals), share small-scale annotated clinical notes.
In this work, we take advantage of the limited expertly annotated resources to generate emrQA.
KB-based QA datasets, used for semantic parsing, are traditionally limited by the requirement of
annotated question and logical form (LF) pairs for
supervision where the LF are used to retrieve answers from a schema (Cai and Yates, 2013; Lopez
et al., 2013; Bordes et al., 2015). Roberts and
Demner-Fushman (2016) generated a corpus by

Datasets
#QA
#QL #notes
Relations
141,243 1,061,710 425
Medications 255,908 198,739 261
Heart disease 30,731 36,746
119
Obesity
23,437
280
1,118
Smoking
4,518
6
502
emrQA
455,837 1,295,814 2,425

Property
Stats.
Question len. 8.6
Evidence len. 18.7
LF len.
33
Note len.
3825
# of evidence 1.5
# Ques. in note 187

Table 1: (left) i2b2 dataset distribution in emrQA, and

How was the |problem| managed ?
How was the patient’s |problem| treated ?
What was done to correct the patient’s |problem| ?
Has the patient ever been treated for a |problem| ?
What treatment has the patient had for his |problem| ?
Has the patient ever received treatment for |problem| ?
What treatments for |problem| has this patient tried ?

Table 2: Paraphrase templates of a question type in emrQA.

(right) emrQA properties with length in tokens, averaged

manually annotating LFs on 468 EMR questions
(not released publicly), thus limiting its ability to
create large scale datasets. In contrast, we only
collect LFs for question templates from a domainexpert - the rest of our corpus is automatically generated.
Recent advances in QA combine logic-based
and neural MC approaches to build hybrid models (Usbeck et al., 2015; Feng et al., 2016; Palangi
et al., 2018). These models are driven to combine
the accuracy of neural approaches (Hermann et al.,
2015) and the interpretability of the symbolic representations in logic-based methods (Gao et al.;
Chabierski et al., 2017). Building interpretable
yet accurate models is extremely important in the
medical domain (Shickel et al., 2017). We generate large-scale ground truth annotations (questions, logical forms, and answers) that can provide
supervision to learn such hybrid models. Our approach to generating emrQA is in the same spirit
as Su et al. (2016), who generate graph queries
(logical forms) from a structured KB and use them
to collect answers. In contrast, our framework can
be applied to generate QA dataset in any domain
with minimal expert input using annotations from
other NLP tasks.

3

QA Dataset Generation Framework

Our general framework for generating a largescale QA corpus given certain resources consists
of three steps: (1) collecting questions to capture
domain-specific user needs, followed by normalizing the collected questions to templates by replacing entities (that may be related via binary or
composite relations) in the question with placeholders. The entity types replaced in the question
are grounded in an ontology like WordNet (Miller,
1995), UMLS (Bodenreider, 2004), or a usergenerated schema that defines and relates different
entity types. (2) We associate question templates
with expert-annotated logical form templates; logical forms are symbolic representations using relations from the ontology/schema to express the
relations in the question, and associate the ques-

tion entity type with an answer entity type. (3) We
then proceed to the important step of re-purposing
existing NLP annotations to populate questionlogical form templates and generate answers. QA
is a complex task that requires addressing several
fundamental NLP problems before accurately answering a question. Hence, obtaining expert manual annotations in complex domains is infeasible
as it is tedious to expert-annotate answers that may
be found across long document collections (e.g.,
longitudinal EMR) (Lee et al., 2017). Thus, we
reverse engineer the process where we reuse expert annotations available in NLP tasks such as
entity recognition, coreference, and relation learning, based on the information captured in the logical forms to populate entity placeholders in templates and generate answers. Reverse engineering
serves as a proxy expert ensuring that the generated QA annotations are credible. The only manual effort is in annotating logical forms, thus significantly reducing expert labor. Moreover, in domain specific instances such as EMRs, manually
annotated logical forms allow the experts to express information essential for natural language
understanding such as domain knowledge, temporal relations, and negation (Gao et al.; Chabierski
et al., 2017). This knowledge, once captured, can
be used to generate QA pairs on new documents,
making the framework scalable.

4

Generating the emrQA Dataset

We apply the proposed framework to generate the
emrQA corpus consisting of questions posed by
physicians against longitudinal EMRs of a patient,
using annotations provided by i2b2 (Figure 2).
4.1

Question Collection and Normalization

We collect questions for EMR QA by, 1) polling
physicians at the Veterans Administration for what
they frequently want to know from the EMR (976
questions), 2) using an existing source of 5,696
questions generated by a team of medical experts
from 71 patient records (Raghavan, 2017) and 3)
using 15 prototypical questions from an obser-

VitalEvent
• Treatment/test
ProcedureEvent
•
•
•
•

SmokingQuitEvent
• QuitDate

Date
• Treatment/test
Result
LabEvent
•
Date
Status
•Result
Test
•
AbnormalResultFlag
Date
• •Status
Result
• •AbnormalResultFlag
• Status
• AbnormalResultFlag

Relations
Attributes
I2b2 entity types
as arguments

SymptomEvent
ConditionEvent

SmokingUseEvent
• IsTobaccoUser
• PacksPerUse
• YearsOfUSe

• problem
• Diagnosisdate
• Status

MedicationEvent
FamilyHistoryEvent
• problem

• Medication/treatment
•
•
•
•
•
•

Dosage
Startdate
Enddate
Route
Adherence
Frequency

Figure 3: Events, attributes & relations in emrQA’s logical
forms. Events & attributes accept i2b2 entities as arguments.

vational study done by physicians (Tang et al.,
1994). To obtain templates, the questions were automatically normalized by identifying medical entities (using MetaMap (Aronson, 2001)) in questions and replacing them with generic placeholders. The resulting ∼2K noisy templates were expert reviewed and corrected (to account for any
entity recognition errors by MetaMap). We align
our entity types to those defined in the i2b2 concept extraction tasks (Uzuner et al., 2010a, 2011)
- problem, test, treatment, mode and medication.
E.g., The question What is the dosage of insulin?
from the collection gets converted to the template
What is the dosage of |medication|? as shown in
Fig.2. This process resulted in 680 question templates. We do not correct for the usage/spelling
errors in these templates, such as usage of "pt"
for "patient", or make the templates gender neutral
in order to provide a true representation of physicians’ questions. Further, analyzing these templates shows that physicians most frequently ask
about test results (11%), medications for problem
(9%), and problem existence (8%). The long tail
following this includes questions about medication dosage, response to treatment, medication duration, prescription date, etiology, etc. Temporal
constraints were frequently imposed on questions
related to tests, problem diagnosis and medication
start/stop.
4.2

Associating Templates w/ Logical Forms

The 680 question templates were annotated by a
physician with their corresponding logical form
(LF) templates, which resulted in 94 unique LF
templates. More than one question template that
map to the same LF are considered paraphrases of
each other and correspond to a particular question
type (Table 2). Logical forms are defined based

on an ontology schema designed by medical experts (Figure 3). This schema captures entities in
unstructured clinical notes through medical events
and their attributes, interconnected through relations. We align the entity and relation types of
i2b2 to this schema.
A formal representation of the LF grammar using this schema (Figure 3) is as follows. Medical events are denoted as M Ei (e.g
LabEvent, ConditionEvent) and relations are denoted as REi (e.g conducted/reveals). Now,
M E[a1 , .., aj , .., oper(an )] is a medical event
where aj represents the attribute of the event (such
as result in LabEvent). An event may optionally
include constraints on attributes captured by an
operator (oper() ∈ sort, range, check for null values, compare). These operators sometimes require
values from external medical KB (indicated by ref,
e.g. lab.ref low/lab.ref high to indicate range of reference standards considered healthy in lab results)
indicating the need for medical knowledge to answer the question. Using these constructs, a LF
can be defined using the following rules,
LF → M Ei | M1 relation M2
M1 → M E i , M2 → M E j
M1 → M1 relation M2 , M2 → M1 relation M2
relation → OR | AN D | REi
Advantages of our LF representation include
the ability to represent composite relations, define attributes for medical events and constrain
the attributes to precisely capture the information need in the question. While these can be
achieved using different methods that combine
lambda calculus and first order logic (Roberts
and Demner-Fushman, 2016), our representation
is more human comprehensible. This allows a
physician to consider an ontology like Figure 3
and easily define a logical form. Some example question templates with their LF annotations
are described in Table 3 using the above notation.
The LF representation of the question in Figure
2 is MedicationEvent(|medication|) [dosage=x].
The entities seen in LF are the entities posed in
the question and entity marked x indicates the answer entity type.
4.3

Template Filling and Answer Extraction

The next step in the process is to populate the
question and logical form (QL) templates with
existing annotations in the i2b2 clinical datasets
and extract answer evidence for the questions.

Property
Fine grained answer type
(attribute entity is answer)
Course grained answer type
(event entity is answer)
Questions with operators on
entities
Questions which require
medical KB
At least one event relation

Example Annotation
Stats.
Q: What is the dosage of |medication| ?
62.7%
LF: MedicationEvent (|medication|) [dosage=x]
Q: What does the patient take |medication| for?
52.1%
LF: MedicationEvent(|medication|)given{ConditionEvent(x) OR SymptomEvent(x)}
Q: What are the last set of labs with elevated numbers out of range?
25.5%
LF: LabEvent (x) [date=x, (result=x)>lab.refhigh]
Q: What are the last set of labs with elevated numbers out of range?
11.7%
LF: LabEvent (x) [date=x, (result=x)>lab.refhigh]
What lab results does he have that are pertinent to |problem| diagnosis
46.8%
LF: LabEvent (x) [date=x, result=x] conducted/reveals ConditionEvent (|problem|)

Table 3: Properties of question templates inferred from the corresponding logical form templates. The boldface words hint at
the presence of the corresponding property in both question and the logical form template.

The i2b2 datasets are expert annotated with
fine-grained annotations (Guo et al., 2006) that
were developed for various shared NLP challenge
tasks, including (1) smoking status classification
(Uzuner et al., 2008), (2) diagnosis of obesity and
its co-morbidities (Uzuner, 2009), extraction of
(3) medication concepts (Uzuner et al., 2010a),
(4) relations, concepts, assertions (Uzuner et al.,
2010b, 2011) (5) co-reference resolution (Uzuner
et al., 2012) and (6) heart disease risk factor
identification (Stubbs and Uzuner, 2015). In
Figure 2, this would correspond to leveraging
annotations from medications challenge between
medications and their dosages, such as medication=Nitroglycerin, dosage=40mg, to populate
|medication| and generate several instances of the
question “What is the dosage of |medication|?"
and
its
corresponding
logical
form
MedicationEvent(|medication|)[dosage=x].
The answer would be derived from the value of
the dosage entity in the dataset.
Preprocessing: The i2b2 entities are preprocessed before using them with our templates to
ensure syntactic correctness of the generated questions. The pre-processing steps are designed based
on the i2b2 annotations syntax guidelines (Guo
et al., 2006). To estimate grammatical correctness, we randomly sampled 500 generated questions and found that <5% had errors. These errors
include, among others, incorrect usage of article
with the entity and incorrect entity phrasing.
Answer Extraction: The final step in the process is generating answer evidence corresponding
to each question. The answers in emrQA are defined differently; instead of a single word or phrase
we provide the entire i2b2 annotation line from
the clinical note as the answer. This is because
the context in which the answer entity or phrase
is mentioned is extremely important in clinical
decision making (Demner-Fushman et al., 2009).

Hence, we call them answer evidence instead of
just answers. For example, consider the question Is the patient’s hypertension controlled?.
The answer to this question is not a simple yes/no
since the status of the patient’s hypertension can
change through the course of treatment. The answer evidence to this question in emrQA are multiple lines across the longitudinal notes that reflect
this potentially changing status of the patients condition, e.g. Hypertension-borderline today. Additionally, for questions seeking specific answers we
also provide the corresponding answer entities.
The overall process for answer evidence generation was vetted by a physician. Here is a brief
overview of how the different i2b2 datasets were
used in generating answers. The relations challenge datasets have various event-relation annotations across single/multiple lines in a clinical
note. We used a combination of one or more of
these, to generate answers for a question; in doing so we used the annotations provided by the
i2b2 co-reference datasets. Similarly, the medications challenge dataset has various event-attribute
annotations but since this dataset is not provided
with co-reference annotations, it is currently not
possible to combine all valid answers. The heart
disease challenge dataset has longitudinal notes
(∼5 per patient) with record dates. The events
in this dataset are also provided with time annotations and are rich in quantitative entities. This
dataset was primarily used to answer questions
that require temporal and arithmetic reasoning
on events. The patient records in the smoking
and obesity challenge datasets are categorized into
classes with no entity annotations. Thus, for questions generated on these datasets, the entire document acts as evidence and the annotated class information (7 classes) needs to be predicted as the
answer.
The total questions, LFs and answers gener-

ated using this framework are summarized in Table 1. Consider the question How much does the
patient smoke? for which we do not have i2b2annotations to provide an answer. In cases where
the answer entity is empty, we only generate the
question and LF, resulting in more question types
being used for QL than QA pairs: only 53% of
question types have answers.

5

emrQA Dataset Analysis

We analyze the complexity of emrQA by considering the LFs for question characteristics, variations
in paraphrases, and the type of reasoning required
for answering questions (Table 2, 3, 4).
5.1

Question/Logical Form Characteristics

A quantitative and qualitative analysis of emrQA
question templates is shown in Table 3, where logical forms help formalize their characteristics (Su
et al., 2016). Questions may request specific finegrained information (attribute values like dosage)
or may express a more coarse-grained need (event
entities like medications etc), or a combination
of both. 25% of questions require complex operators (e.g compare(>)) and 12% of questions
express the need for external medical knowledge
(e.g. lab.refhigh). The questions in emrQA are
highly compositional, where 47% of question templates have at least one event relation.
5.2

Paraphrase Complexity Analysis

Questions templates that map to the same LF are
considered paraphrases (e.g, Table 2) and correspond to the same question type. In emrQA, an
average of 7 paraphrase templates exist per question type. This is representative of FAQ types that
are perhaps more important to the physician. Good
paraphrases are lexically dissimilar to each other
(Chen and Dolan, 2011). In order to understand
the lexical variation within our paraphrases, we
randomly select a question from the list of paraphrases as a reference and evaluate the others with
respect to the reference, and report the average
BLEU (0.74 ± 0.06) and Jaccard Score (0.72 ±
0.19). The low BLEU and Jaccard score with large
standard deviation indicates the lexical diversity
captured by emrQA’s paraphrases (Papineni et al.,
2002; Niwattanakul et al., 2013).
5.3

Answer Evidence Analysis

33% of the questions in emrQA have more than
one answer evidence, with the number ranging

from 2 to 61. E.g., the question Medications
Record? has all medications in the patient’s longitudinal record as answer evidence. In order to
analyze the reasoning required to answer emrQA
questions, we sampled 35 clinical notes from the
corpus and analyzed 3 random questions per note
by manually labeling them with the categories described in Table 4. Categories are not mutually
exclusive: a single example can fall into multiple
categories. We compare and contrast this analysis with SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2016), a popular MC dataset generated through crowdsourcing,
to show that the framework is capable of generating a corpus as representative and even more complex. Compared to SQuAD, emrQA offers two
new reasoning categories, temporal and arithmetic
which make up 31% of the dataset. Additionally, over two times as many questions in emrQA
require reasoning over multiple sentences. Long
and noisy documents make the question answering task more difficult (Joshi et al., 2017). EMRs
are inherently noisy and hence 29% have incomplete context and the document length is 27 times
more than SQuAD which offers new challenges to
existing QA models. Owing to the domain specific
nature of the task, 39% of the examples required
some form of medical/world knowledge.
As discussed in Section 4.3, 12% of the questions in emrQA corpus require a class category
from i2b2 smoking and obesity datasets to be predicted. We also found 6% of the questions had
other possible answers that were not included by
emrQA, this is because of the lack of co-reference
annotations for the medications challenge.

6

Baseline Methods

We implement baseline models using neural and
heuristic methods for question to logical form (QL) and question to answer (Q-A) mapping.
6.1

Q-L Mapping

Heuristic Models: We use a template-matching
approach where we first split the data into
train/test sets, and then normalize questions in
the test set into templates by replacing entities
with placeholders. The templates are then scored
against the ground truth templates of the questions
in the train set, to find the best match. The placeholders in the LF template corresponding to the
best matched question template is then filled with
the normalized entities to obtain the predicted LF.
To normalize the test questions we use CLiNER

Reasoning
Lexical Variation
(Synonym)

Description
Example Annotation
emrQA SQuAD
Major correspondence between the Q: Has this patient ever been treated with insulin? 15.2% 33.3%
question and answer sentence are E: Patient sugars were managed o/n with sliding
synonyms.
scale insulin and diabetic
Major correspondence between the Q: Has the patient complained of any CAD symp- 39.0% 9.1%
Lexical Variation
question and answer sentence re- toms?
(world/medical
quires world/medical knowledge to E: 70-year-old female who comes in with
knowledge)
substernal chest pressure
resolve
60.0% 64.1%
Syntactic Variation After the question is paraphrased Q: Has this patient ever been treated with ffp?
into declarative form, its syntac- E: attempt to reverse anticoagulation , one unit of
tic dependency structure does not FFP was begun
match that of the answer sentence
Multiple Sentence Co-reference and higher level fu- Q: What happened when the patient was given as- 23.8% 13.6%
sion of multiple sentences
cending aortic root replacement?
E: The patient tolerated the procedure fairly well
and was transferred to the ICU with his chest open
Arithmetic
Knowing comparison and subtrac- Q: Show me any LDL > 100 mg/dl in the last 6 13.3% N.A.
tion operators.
years?
E: gluc 192, LDL 115, TG 71, HDL 36
Temporal
Reasoning based on time frame
Q: What were the results of the abnormal A1C on 18.1% N.A.
2115-12-14?
E: HBA1C 12/14/2115 11.80
Incomplete
Unstructured clinical text is noisy Q: What is her current dose of iron?
28.6% N.A.
Context
and may have missing context
E: Iron 325 mg p.o. t.i.d.
Class Prediction
Questions for which a specific pre- Q: Is the patient currently Obese?
12.4% N.A.
defined class needs to be predicted E: Yes

Table 4: We manually labeled 105 examples into one or more of the above categories. Words relevant to the corresponding
reasoning type are in bold and the answer entity (if any) in the evidence is in italics. We compare this analysis with SQuAD.
Dataset
GeoQuery
ATIS
emrQL-1
emrQL-2

Train/Test
600/280
4,473/448
1M/253K
1.1M/296K

HM-1
32.8%
20.8%
0.3%
31.6%

HM-2
52.1%
52.2%
26.3%
32.0%

Neural
74.6%†
69.9%†
22.4%
42.7%

Table 5: Heuristic (HM) and neural (seq2seq) models performance on question to logical form learning in emrQA.

(Boag et al., 2015) for emrQA and Jia and Liang
(2016)’s work for ATIS and GeoQuery. Scoring
and matching is done using two heuristics: (1)
HM-1, which computes an identical match, and
(2) HM-2, which generates a GloVe vector (Arora
et al., 2016) representation of the templates using
sentence2vec and then computes pairwise cosine
similarity.
Neural Model: We train a sequence-tosequence (seq2seq) (Sutskever et al., 2014) with
attention paradigm (Bahdanau et al., 2014; Luong
et al., 2017) as our neural baseline (2 layers, each
with 64 hidden units). The same setting when used
with Geoquery and ATIS gives poor results because the parameters are not appropriate for the
nature of that dataset. Hence, for comparison with
GeoQuery and ATIS, we use the results of seq2seq
model with a single 200 hidden units layer (Jia and
Liang, 2016). At test time we automatically balance missing right parentheses.
†

results from Jia and Liang (2016)

6.1.1

Experimental Setup

We randomly partition the QL pairs in the dataset
in train(80%) and test(20%) sets in two ways. (1)
In emrQL-1, we first split the paraphrase templates
corresponding to a single LF template into train
and test, and then generate the instances of QL
pairs. (2) In emrQL-2, we first generate the instances of QL pairs from the templates and then
distribute them into train and test sets. As a result,
emrQL-1 has more lexical variation between train
and test distribution compared to emrQL-2, resulting in increased paraphrase complexity. We use
accuracy i.e, the total number of logical forms predicted correctly as a metric to evaluate our model.
6.1.2

Results

The performance of the proposed models is summarized in Table 5. emrQL results are not directly
comparable with GeoQuery and ATIS because of
the differences in the lexicon and tools available
for the domains. However, it helps us establish
that QL learning in emrQA is non-trivial and supports significant future work.
Error analysis of heuristic models on emrQL-1
and emrQL-2 showed that 70% of the errors occurred because of incorrect question normalization. In fact, 30% of these questions had not been
normalized at all. This shows that the entities

added to the templates are complex and diverse
and make the inverse process of template generation non trivial. This makes a challenging QL
corpus that cannot trivially be solved by template
matching based approaches.
Errors made by the neural model on both
emrQL-1 and emrQL-2 are due to long LFs (20%)
and incorrectly identified entities (10%), which
are harder for the attention-based model (Jia and
Liang, 2016). The increased paraphrase complexity in emrQL-1 compared to emrQL-2 resulted in
20% more structural errors in emrQL-1, where the
predicted event/grammar structure deviates significantly from the ground truth. This shows that the
model is not adequately capturing the semantics
in the questions to generalize to new paraphrases.
Therefore, emrQL-1 can be used to benchmark QL
models robust to paraphrasing.

Model
DrQA (MC)
Class Prediction

Train/Test
47,605/9,966
1276/320

Exact Match
59.2%
36.6%

F1
60.6
n.a

Table 7: Performance of baseline models on the two QA sub
tasks, machine comprehension (MC) and class prediction.

present within the evidence, otherwise it checks if
the predicted evidence span lies within ±20 characters of the ground truth evidence. For F1 we
construct a bag of tokens for each evidence string
and measure the F1 score of the overlap between
the two bags of tokens. Since there may be multiple evidence for a given question, we consider
only the top 10 predictions and report an average
of EM and F1 over ground truth number of answers. In the class prediction setting, we report
the subset accuracy.

6.2.1 Experimental setup
We consider a 80-20 split of the data for train-test.
In order to evaluate worst-case performance, we
train on question-evidence pairs in a clinical note
obtained by using only one random paraphrase for
a question instead of all the paraphrases. We use a
slightly modified‡ version of the two popularly reported metrics in MC for evaluation since our evidence span is longer: Exact Match (EM) and F1.
Wherever the answer entity in an evidence is explicitly known, EM checks if the answer entity is

6.2.2 Results
The performance of the proposed models is summarized in Table 7. DrQA is one of the best performing models on SQuAD with an F1 of 78.8 and
EM of 69.5. The relatively low performance of the
models on emrQA (60.6 F1 and 59.2 EM) shows
that QA on EMRs is a complex task and offers new
challenges to existing QA models.
To understand model performance, we macroaverage the EM across all the questions corresponding to a LF template. We observe that LFs
representing temporal and arithmetic§ needs had
< 16% EM. LFs expressing the need for medical KB§ performed poorly since we used general
Glove embeddings. An analysis of LFs which had
approximately equal number of QA pair representation in the test set revealed an interesting relation
between the model performance and LF complexity, as summarized in Table 6. The trend shows
that performance is worse on multiple relation
questions as compared to single relation and attribute questions, showing that the LFs sufficiently
capture the complexity of the questions and give
us an ability to do a qualitative model analysis.
Error analysis on a random sample of 50 questions containing at least one answer entity in an
evidence showed that: (1) 38% of the examples required multiple sentence reasoning of which 16%
were due to a missing evidence in a multiple evidence question, (2) 14% were due to syntactic
variation, (3) 10% required medical reasoning and
(4) in 14%, DrQA predicted an incomplete evidence span missing the answer entity in it.

‡
using the original definitions, the evaluated values were
far less than those obtained in Table 7

§
maximum representation of these templates comes from
the i2b2 heart disease risk dataset

6.2

Q-A Mapping

Question-answering on emrQA consists of two
different tasks, (1) extraction of answer line from
the clinical note (machine comprehension (MC))
and (2) prediction of answer class based on the entire clinical note. We provide baseline models to
illustrate the complexity in doing both these tasks.
Machine Comprehension: To do extractive
QA on EMRs, we use DrQA’s (Chen et al., 2017)
document reader which is a multi-layer RNN
based MC model. We use their best performing
settings trained for SQuAD data using Glove vectors (300 dim-840B).
Class Prediction: We build a multi-class logistic regression model for predicting a class as an
answer based on the patient’s clinical note. Features input to the classifier are TF-IDF vectors of
the question and the clinical notes taken from i2b2
smoking and obesity datasets.

Logical Form template
MedicationEvent (|medication|) [enddate=x]
{LabEvent (|test|) OR ProcedureEvent (|test|)} conducted
{ConditionEvent(x) OR SymptomEvent (x)}
{MedicationEvent(|treatment|)ORProcedureEvent(|treatment|)}
improves/worsens/causes {ConditionEvent (x) OR SymptomEvent (x)}

Property
single attribute
single relation

Exact Match
55.3%
32.2%

multiple relation

12.6%

Table 6: Neural models (DrQA) performance on question-evidence corpus of emrQA stratified according to the logical
form templates. Instance showing increasing complexity in the logical forms with decreasing model performance.

7

Discussion

In this section, we describe how our generation
framework may also be applied to generate opendomain QA datasets given the availability of other
NLP resources. We also discuss possible extensions of the framework to increase the complexity
of the generated datasets.
Open domain QA dataset generation: Consider the popularly used SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al.,
2016) reading comprehension dataset generated
by crowdworkers, where the answer to every question is a segment of text from the corresponding
passage in the Wikipedia article. This dataset can
easily be generated or extended using our proposed framework with existing NLP annotations
on Wikipedia (Auer et al., 2007; Nothman et al.,
2008; Ghaddar and Langlais, 2017).
For instance, consider DBPedia (Auer et al.,
2007), an existing dataset of entities and their relations extracted from Wikipedia. It also has its
own ontology which can serve as the semantic
frames schema to define logical forms. Using
these resources, our reverse engineering technique
for QA dataset generation can be applied as follows. (1) Question templates can be defined for
each entity type and relation in DBPedia. For
example¶ , consider the relation [place, country]
field in DBpedia. For this we can define a question template In what country is |place| located?.
(2) Every such question template can be annotated
with a logical form template using existing DBPedia ontology. (3) By considering the entity values of DBPedia fields such as [place=Normandy,
dbo:country=France], we can automatically generate the question In what country is Normandy
located? and its corresponding logical form from
the templates. The text span of country=France
from the Wikipedia passage is then used as the
answer (Daiber et al., 2013). Currently, this QA
pair instance is a part of the SQuAD dev set. Using our framework we can generate many more instances like this example from different Wikipedia
passages - without crowdsourcing efforts.
¶

example reference: http://dbpedia.org/page/Normandy

Extensions to the framework: The complexity
of the generated dataset can be further extended as
follows. (1) We can use a coreferred or a lexical
variant of the original entity in the question-logical
form generation. This can allow for increased lexical variation between the question and answer line
entities in the passage. (2) It is possible to combine
two or more question templates to make compositional questions with the answers to these questions similarly combined. This can also result in
more multiple sentence reasoning questions. (3)
We can generate questions with entities not related
to the context in the passage. This can increase
empty answer questions in the dataset, resulting in
increased negative training examples.

8

Conclusions and Future Work

We propose a novel framework that can generate
a large-scale QA dataset using existing resources
and minimal expert input. This has the potential
to make a huge impact in domains like medicine,
where obtaining manual QA annotations is tedious
and infeasible. We apply this framework to generate a large scale EMR QA corpus (emrQA), consisting of 400,000 question-answers pairs and 1
million question-logical forms, and analyze the
complexity of the dataset to show its non-trivial
nature. We show that the logical forms provide a
symbolic representation that is very useful for corpus generation and for model analysis. The logical forms also provide an opportunity to build interpretable systems by perhaps jointly (or latently)
learning the logical form and answer for a question. In future, this framework may be applied to
also re-purpose and integrate other NLP datasets
such as MIMIC and generate a more diverse and
representative EMR QA corpus (Johnson et al.,
2016).

Acknowledgments
This project is partially funded by Sloan Research
Fellowship, PhRMA Foundation Award in Informatics, and NSF Career Award (1652815). The
authors would like to thank Siddharth Patwardhan
for his valuable feedback in formatting the paper.

References
Alan R Aronson. 2001. Effective mapping of biomedical text to the umls metathesaurus: the metamap
program. In Proceedings of the AMIA Symposium,
page 17. American Medical Informatics Association.
Sanjeev Arora, Yingyu Liang, and Tengyu Ma. 2016.
A simple but tough-to-beat baseline for sentence embeddings.
Sören Auer, Christian Bizer, Georgi Kobilarov, Jens
Lehmann, Richard Cyganiak, and Zachary Ives.
2007. Dbpedia: A nucleus for a web of open data.
In The semantic web, pages 722–735. Springer.
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. Neural machine translation by jointly
learning to align and translate. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1409.0473.
Jonathan Berant, Vivek Srikumar, Pei-Chun Chen,
Abby Vander Linden, Brittany Harding, Brad
Huang, Peter Clark, and Christopher D Manning.
2014. Modeling biological processes for reading
comprehension. In EMNLP.
William Boag, Kevin Wacome, Tristan Naumann, and
Anna Rumshisky. 2015. Cliner: A lightweight tool
for clinical named entity recognition. AMIA Joint
Summits on Clinical Research Informatics (poster).
Olivier Bodenreider. 2004. The unified medical language system (umls): integrating biomedical terminology. Nucleic acids research, 32(suppl_1):D267–
D270.
Antoine Bordes, Nicolas Usunier, Sumit Chopra, and
Jason Weston. 2015. Large-scale simple question
answering with memory networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1506.02075.
Qingqing Cai and Alexander Yates. 2013. Large-scale
semantic parsing via schema matching and lexicon
extension. In ACL (1), pages 423–433.
Piotr Chabierski, Alessandra Russo, and Mark Law.
2017. Logic-based approach to machine comprehension of text.
Danqi Chen, Adam Fisch, Jason Weston, and Antoine Bordes. 2017. Reading wikipedia to answer open-domain questions.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1704.00051.
David L Chen and William B Dolan. 2011. Collecting highly parallel data for paraphrase evaluation.
In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies-Volume 1, pages 190–200.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Joachim Daiber, Max Jakob, Chris Hokamp, and
Pablo N. Mendes. 2013. Improving efficiency
and accuracy in multilingual entity extraction. In
Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on
Semantic Systems (I-Semantics).

Randall Davis, Bruce Buchanan, and Edward Shortliffe. 1977. Production rules as a representation for
a knowledge-based consultation program. Artificial
intelligence, 8(1):15–45.
Dina Demner-Fushman, Wendy Webber Chapman, and
Clement J. McDonald. 2009. What can natural language processing do for clinical decision support?
Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 42(5):760–772.
Mary Devereaux. 2013. The use of patient records
(ehr) for research.
Bhuwan Dhingra, Kathryn Mazaitis, and William W
Cohen. 2017. Quasar: Datasets for question answering by search and reading. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1707.03904.
Minwei Feng, Bing Xiang, Michael R Glass, Lidan Wang, and Bowen Zhou. 2015. Applying
deep learning to answer selection: A study and an
open task. In Automatic Speech Recognition and
Understanding (ASRU), 2015 IEEE Workshop on,
pages 813–820. IEEE.
Yansong Feng, Songfang Huang, Dongyan Zhao, et al.
2016. Hybrid question answering over knowledge
base and free text. In Proceedings of COLING 2016,
the 26th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics: Technical Papers, pages 2397–2407.
David Ferrucci, Eric Brown, Jennifer Chu-Carroll,
James Fan, David Gondek, Aditya A Kalyanpur,
Adam Lally, J William Murdock, Eric Nyberg, John
Prager, et al. 2010. Building watson: An overview
of the deepqa project. AI magazine, 31(3):59–79.
Jianfeng Gao, Rangan Majumder, and Bill Dolan. Machine reading for question answering: from symbolic to neural computation.
Abbas Ghaddar and Phillippe Langlais. 2017. Winer:
A wikipedia annotated corpus for named entity recognition. In Proceedings of the Eighth
International Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), volume 1,
pages 413–422.
Y. Guo, R. Gaizauskas, I. Roberts, G. Demetriou,
and M. Hepple. 2006. Identifying personal health
information using support vector machines. In
i2b2 Workshop on Challenges in Natural Language
Processing for Clinical Data, pages 10–11.
Karl Moritz Hermann, Tomas Kocisky, Edward
Grefenstette, Lasse Espeholt, Will Kay, Mustafa
Suleyman, and Phil Blunsom. 2015. Teaching
machines to read and comprehend. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages
1693–1701.
Robin Jia and Percy Liang. 2016. Data recombination for neural semantic parsing. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1606.03622.

Alistair EW Johnson, Tom J Pollard, Lu Shen,
H Lehman Li-wei, Mengling Feng, Mohammad Ghassemi, Benjamin Moody, Peter Szolovits,
Leo Anthony Celi, and Roger G Mark. 2016.
Mimic-iii, a freely accessible critical care database.
Scientific data, 3:160035.
Mandar Joshi, Eunsol Choi, Daniel S Weld, and Luke
Zettlemoyer. 2017. Triviaqa: A large scale distantly
supervised challenge dataset for reading comprehension. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.03551.
Harlan M Krumholz, Sharon F Terry, and Joanne Waldstreicher. 2016. Data acquisition, curation, and use
for a continuously learning health system. Jama,
316(16):1669–1670.
Chonho Lee, Zhaojing Luo, Kee Yuan Ngiam, Meihui Zhang, Kaiping Zheng, Gang Chen, Beng Chin
Ooi, and Wei Luen James Yip. 2017. Big healthcare data analytics: Challenges and applications. In
Handbook of Large-Scale Distributed Computing in
Smart Healthcare, pages 11–41. Springer.
Vanessa Lopez, Christina Unger, Philipp Cimiano, and
Enrico Motta. 2013. Evaluating question answering
over linked data. Web Semantics: Science, Services
and Agents on the World Wide Web, 21:3–13.
Minh-Thang Luong, Eugene Brevdo, and Rui Zhao.
2017. Neural machine translation (seq2seq) tutorial.
https://github.com/tensorflow/nmt.
George A Miller. 1995. Wordnet: a lexical database for
english. Communications of the ACM, 38(11):39–
41.
Suphakit Niwattanakul, Jatsada Singthongchai,
Ekkachai Naenudorn, and Supachanun Wanapu.
2013. Using of jaccard coefficient for keywords
similarity. In Proceedings of the International
MultiConference of Engineers and Computer
Scientists, volume 1.
Joel Nothman, James R Curran, and Tara Murphy.
2008. Transforming wikipedia into named entity
training data. In Proceedings of the Australasian
Language Technology Association Workshop 2008,
pages 124–132.
Hamid Palangi, Paul Smolensky, Xiaodong He,
and Li Deng. 2018.
Question-answering with
grammatically-interpretable representations.
In
Proceedings of the 32nd AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, New Orleans, LA.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and WeiJing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings
of the 40th annual meeting on association for
computational linguistics, pages 311–318. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Preethi Raghavan and Siddharth Patwardhan. 2016.
Question answering on electronic medical records.
In Proceedings of the 2016 Summit on Clinical

Research Informatics, San Francisco, CA, March
2016.
Siddharth; Liang Jennifer J.; Devarakonda Murthy V.
Raghavan, Preethi; Patwardhan. 2017. Annotating
electronic medical records for question answering.
arXiv:1805.06816.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and
Percy Liang. 2016. Squad: 100,000+ questions
for machine comprehension of text. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1606.05250.
Matthew Richardson, Christopher JC Burges, and Erin
Renshaw. 2013. Mctest: A challenge dataset for
the open-domain machine comprehension of text. In
EMNLP, volume 3, page 4.
Kirk Roberts and Dina Demner-Fushman. 2016. Annotating logical forms for ehr questions. In LREC...
International Conference on Language Resources &
Evaluation:[proceedings]. International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation, volume
2016, page 3772. NIH Public Access.
Benjamin Shickel, Patrick James Tighe, Azra Bihorac,
and Parisa Rashidi. 2017. Deep ehr: A survey of recent advances in deep learning techniques for electronic health record (ehr) analysis. IEEE Journal of
Biomedical and Health Informatics.
Amber Stubbs and Özlem Uzuner. 2015. Annotating
longitudinal clinical narratives for de-identification:
The 2014 i2b2/uthealth corpus.
Journal of
biomedical informatics, 58:S20–S29.
Yu Su, Huan Sun, Brian Sadler, Mudhakar Srivatsa,
Izzeddin Gur, Zenghui Yan, and Xifeng Yan. 2016.
On generating characteristic-rich question sets for qa
evaluation. In EMNLP, pages 562–572.
Simon Šuster, Stéphan Tulkens, and Walter Daelemans.
2017. A short review of ethical challenges in clinical natural language processing. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1703.10090.
Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V Le.
2014. Sequence to sequence learning with neural networks. In Advances in neural information
processing systems, pages 3104–3112.
Paul C Tang, Danielle Fafchamps, and Edward H
Shortliffe. 1994. Traditional medical records as a
source of clinical data in the outpatient setting. In
Proceedings of the Annual Symposium on Computer
Application in Medical Care, page 575. American
Medical Informatics Association.
Adam Trischler, Tong Wang, Xingdi Yuan, Justin Harris, Alessandro Sordoni, Philip Bachman, and Kaheer Suleman. 2016. Newsqa: A machine comprehension dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.09830.
George Tsatsaronis, Georgios Balikas, Prodromos
Malakasiotis, Ioannis Partalas, Matthias Zschunke,
Michael R Alvers, Dirk Weissenborn, Anastasia

Krithara, Sergios Petridis, Dimitris Polychronopoulos, et al. 2015.
An overview of the bioasq
large-scale biomedical semantic indexing and question answering competition. BMC bioinformatics,
16(1):138.
Ricardo Usbeck, Axel-Cyrille Ngonga Ngomo, Lorenz
Bühmann, and Christina Unger. 2015. Hawk–
hybrid question answering using linked data. In
European Semantic Web Conference, pages 353–
368. Springer.
Özlem Uzuner. 2009. Recognizing obesity and comorbidities in sparse data. Journal of the American
Medical Informatics Association, 16(4):561–570.
Ozlem Uzuner, Andreea Bodnari, Shuying Shen, Tyler
Forbush, John Pestian, and Brett R South. 2012.
Evaluating the state of the art in coreference resolution for electronic medical records. Journal
of the American Medical Informatics Association,
19(5):786–791.
Özlem Uzuner, Ira Goldstein, Yuan Luo, and Isaac Kohane. 2008. Identifying patient smoking status from
medical discharge records. Journal of the American
Medical Informatics Association, 15(1):14–24.
Özlem Uzuner, Imre Solti, and Eithon Cadag. 2010a.
Extracting medication information from clinical
text. Journal of the American Medical Informatics
Association, 17(5):514–518.
Özlem Uzuner, Imre Solti, Fei Xia, and Eithon
Cadag. 2010b. Community annotation experiment
for ground truth generation for the i2b2 medication challenge. Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association, 17(5):519–523.
Özlem Uzuner, Brett R South, Shuying Shen, and
Scott L DuVall. 2011. 2010 i2b2/va challenge
on concepts, assertions, and relations in clinical
text. Journal of the American Medical Informatics
Association, 18(5):552–556.
Alfredo Vellido, José David Martín-Guerrero, and
Paulo JG Lisboa. 2012. Making machine learning
models interpretable. In ESANN, volume 12, pages
163–172. Citeseer.
Ellen M Voorhees et al. 1999. The trec-8 question answering track report. In Trec, volume 99, pages 77–
82.

