Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

F ROM C ONVERSATION TO Q UERY E XECUTION :
B ENCHMARKING U SER AND T OOL I NTERACTIONS
FOR EHR DATABASE AGENTS

arXiv:2509.23415v2 [cs.AI] 2 Mar 2026

Gyubok Lee1вҲ—, Woosog Chay1 , Heeyoung Kwak2 , Yeong Hwa Kim2
Haanju Yoo2 , Oksoon Jeong3 , Meong Hi Son3 , Edward Choi1
KAIST1 NAVER Cloud2 Samsung Medical Center3
{gyubok.lee,edwardchoi}@kaist.ac.kr1

A BSTRACT
Despite the impressive performance of LLM-powered agents, their adoption for
Electronic Health Record (EHR) data access remains limited by the absence of
benchmarks that adequately capture real-world clinical data access flows. In practice, two core challenges hinder deployment: query ambiguity from vague user
questions and value mismatch between user terminology and database entries. To
address this, we introduce EHR-ChatQA, an interactive database question answering benchmark that evaluates the end-to-end workflow of database agents: clarifying user questions, using tools to resolve value mismatches, and generating
correct SQL to deliver accurate answers. To cover diverse patterns of query ambiguity and value mismatch, EHR-ChatQA assesses agents in a simulated environment with an LLM-based user across two interaction flows: Incremental Query
Refinement (IncreQA), where users add constraints to existing queries, and Adaptive Query Refinement (AdaptQA), where users adjust their search goals midconversation. Experiments with state-of-the-art LLMs (e.g., o4-mini and Gemini2.5-Flash) over five i.i.d. trials show that while the best-performing agents achieve
Pass@5 of over 90% (at least one of five trials) on IncreQA and 60вҖ“70% on
AdaptQA, their PassвҲ§ 5 (consistent success across all five trials) is substantially
lower, with gaps of up to about 60%. These results underscore the need to build
agents that are not only performant but also robust for the safety-critical EHR
domain. Finally, we provide diagnostic insights into common failure modes to
guide future agent development. Our code and data are publicly available at
https://github.com/glee4810/EHR-ChatQA.

1

I NTRODUCTION

Large Language Models (LLMs) are increasingly operating as autonomous agents, interacting with
external environments to solve complex tasks. One key application is interfacing with structured
databases, which can substantially enhance data accessibility for non-technical users. This capability is particularly impactful in high-stakes domains such as Electronic Health Records (EHRs),
where enabling natural language queries over vast patient data repositories has the potential to fundamentally transform both clinical research and patient care (Ohno-Machado, 2011; Yang et al.,
2022). To assess such capabilities, the prevailing evaluation paradigm has relied on text-to-SQL
benchmarks (Yu et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023), which measure
a modelвҖҷs ability to translate natural language questions into SQL queries. However, these benchmarks primarily emphasize the isolated task of mapping a single, well-formed question to SQL, a
setting that fails to capture the complexities of how clinicians interact with EHRs.
To further investigate the gap between this evaluation paradigm and real-world clinical needs, we
collaborated with a major academic medical center and reviewed internal text-to-SQL query logs.
This analysis revealed that existing benchmarks are not suitable for capturing two core real-world
вҲ—

This work was mostly done during his internship at NAVER Cloud.

1

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

Figure 1: Overview of EHR-ChatQA. Our benchmark places an agent in a simulated environment
with an LLM-powered user and tools. The agent must manage the entire workflow autonomously:
clarifying vague user questions, resolving terminology mismatches, generating and executing accurate SQL, and returning the final answer. When the interaction is over, each trace is verified by a
simulation validator, and only traces that pass proceed to rule-based evaluation.
challenges, which significantly hinders the adoption of these models: (1) Query Ambiguity1 : Users
often pose vague questions that do not fully capture their true intent (e.g., a request such as вҖңShow me
recent labsвҖқ lacks specifics such as test types or time ranges) (Wang et al., 2023; Saparina & Lapata,
2024; Dong et al., 2025). (2) Value Mismatch: Clinical terms in EHRs vary due to specialized
database naming conventions and often differ from everyday language (e.g., вҖңLopressorвҖқ may not
match the database entry вҖңmetoprolol tartrateвҖқ), creating a terminological gap (Holmes et al., 2021;
De Mello et al., 2022) that must be bridged for accurate SQL generation.
Addressing these challenges requires moving beyond static, single-turn SQL generation to an environment where an agent can clarify a userвҖҷs intent, invoke necessary tools to navigate complex EHR
schemas and clinical values, and synthesize all relevant information to generate an accurate SQL
query. To bridge this gap, we introduce EHR-ChatQA, an interactive database question answering
(QA) benchmark designed to assess this end-to-end agentic workflow, from conversation to query
execution, in the EHR domain. By placing agents in a simulated environment with both an LLMbased user and a suite of tools, EHR-ChatQA provides a holistic evaluation of agent capabilities in
interactive clinical data access flows. Each interaction trace is further verified by a dedicated validator to ensure evaluation reliability. Our benchmark is grounded in real-world clinical QA scenarios
and two publicly available EHR databases (MIMIC-IV and eICU). It consists of tasks categorized
into two interaction flows designed for various query ambiguities and value mismatches: Incremental Query Refinement (IncreQA), where users add new constraints to a query, and Adaptive Query
Refinement (AdaptQA), where users adjust their search goals mid-conversation.
Our evaluation of various state-of-the-art LLMs on EHR-ChatQA reveals a critical lack of robustness
under diverse conversation paths. While agents often succeed in at least one of five attempts on a
task (Pass@5), their ability to succeed consistently in all five attempts (PassвҲ§ 5) is substantially
lower. This performance gap exceeds 38% for IncreQA and 36% for AdaptQA, reaching up to about
60%. This inconsistency highlights a crucial lack of reliability in current agents, raising significant
concerns for their deployment in safety-critical domains such as EHRs and pointing to key areas for
future research.
The main contributions of our work are summarized as follows:
вҖў We propose EHR-ChatQA, the first interactive benchmark for EHR QA that holistically
evaluates agentsвҖҷ interactive, end-to-end workflows using simulated users and a set of customizable tools for schema exploration, value exploration, and web search.
вҖў Grounded in real-world clinical QA scenarios and two publicly available EHR databases,
the benchmark contains two interaction flows to reflect various query ambiguity and value
mismatch patterns.
1
While linguistics distinguishes it from vagueness (a lack of specificity), we adopt the common NLP convention of using вҖңambiguityвҖқ to refer to any query requiring clarification.

2

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

вҖў Our evaluation of various LLMs reveals a critical performance gap between an agentвҖҷs optimistic success (Pass@5) and its consistent success (PassвҲ§ 5), providing diagnostic insights
for developing more performant and reliable agents in interactive EHR QA.

2

R ELATED W ORK

Text-to-SQL Benchmarks Text-to-SQL research has largely focused on translating a single, welldefined question into an SQL query. Benchmarks such as Spider (Yu et al., 2018) and BIRD (Li
et al., 2023) are prominent examples that have shaped this paradigm. While other benchmarks
such as SParC (Yu et al., 2019b), CoSQL (Yu et al., 2019a), and PRACTIQ (Dong et al., 2025)
introduced conversational context, their evaluation scope is often limited by predefined interaction
patterns, such as requiring the model to generate an SQL query each turn or to expect a type of
responses based on the script. This evaluation setting prevents them from capturing the open-ended
and exploratory nature of realistic user interactions, thereby falling short of testing agentsвҖҷ ability to
resolve query ambiguity and value mismatch. EHR-ChatQA is a benchmark dedicated to bridging
this gap by explicitly evaluating agentsвҖҷ exploratory and interactive capabilities through simulations.
EHR Question Answering The unique challenges of the medical domain have inspired several
QA benchmarks for structured EHR data. Text-to-SQL benchmarks, from single-turn settings such
as MIMICSQL (Wang et al., 2020) and EHRSQL (Lee et al., 2022) to the multi-turn EHR-SeqSQL
(Ryu et al., 2024), have advanced querying on complex EHR schemas but lack support for resolving
query ambiguity and value mismatch. More recently, agent-based benchmarks for EHRs such as
MedAgentBench (Jiang et al., 2025) and MedAgentGym (Xu et al., 2025) tackle a broad range of
clinical and biomedical tasks. However, their reliance on initial non-ambiguous task instructions
still bypasses the need for dynamic, interactive resolution of query ambiguity and value mismatch,
which are essential for real-world, interactive clinical QA. EHR-ChatQA aims to bridge this gap
by explicitly requiring the simulated user to start from a vague question and allowing the agent to
autonomously resolve the task.
Conversational and Tool-Using Agent Evaluation Evaluating LLM agents in dynamic environments has spurred progress in two key areas: tool-using agent benchmarks (Yao et al., 2022; Liu
et al.), which assess instrumental competence, and frameworks for evaluating conversational skills
in task-oriented dialogues, from large-scale curated datasets (Budzianowski et al., 2018; Rastogi
et al., 2020) to dynamic user simulations (SekulicМҒ et al., 2024). Recent works such as Tau-Bench
(Yao et al., 2025) and ToolDial (Shim et al., 2025) combine these paradigms to evaluate the critical dual interaction loop between agents, users, and tools. EHR-ChatQA extends this framework
to question answering over EHR databases. As shown in Table 1, although prior works focus on
resolving query ambiguity and leveraging general tools for complex tasks, they do not specifically
capture the challenges of interactive clinical data access, particularly value mismatch (Holmes et al.,
2021; De Mello et al., 2022). EHR-ChatQA is designed to holistically address these challenges,
grounded in real-world QA scenarios and EHR databases.

3

T HE EHR-C HAT QA B ENCHMARK

3.1

TASK F ORMULATION

The task instances in EHR-ChatQA can be formulated in the POMDP framework as
(S, A, T , R, в„Ұ), capturing the inherent uncertainty and sequential nature of translating an ambiguous user request into an executable query. The state s вҲҲ S is latent and includes the userвҖҷs true
but unobserved intent (i.e., user instruction), the full conversation history, the contents of the EHR
database, and any accessible external knowledge. The agentвҖҷs action space A models the dual interaction loop: (1) user interaction, including asking clarifying questions or providing answers, and
(2) tool interaction, including invoking calls to explore the database schema, search relevant values,
or access external web knowledge when necessary. After taking an action a вҲҲ A, the agent receives
an observation o вҲҲ в„Ұ, which is either a natural language response from the user or the output from
a tool. The transition dynamics T combine deterministic and stochastic processes: tool interactions
with the database are deterministic, while the LLM-based userвҖҷs responses and web search results
are stochastic. The reward function R is binary, defined as r = 1 if the agentвҖҷs answer matches the
3

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

Table 1: Comparison of recent benchmarks categorized by core agent capabilities. EHR-ChatQA is
the first benchmark to comprehensively evaluate database agents in the aspects ranging from conversational ability to effective tool use in the EHR domain. вҖңValue Explor.вҖқ indicates the mapping
of user terminology to database entries (e.g., вҖңWBCвҖқ вҶ’ вҖңwhite blood cell countвҖқ). в–і denotes resolution of ambiguity through SQL suggestions instead of user clarification.
Benchmark
Spider (Yu et al., 2018)
SParC (Yu et al., 2019b)
CoSQL (Yu et al., 2019a)
EHRSQL (Lee et al., 2022)
BIRD (Li et al., 2023)
AgentBench (Liu et al.)
EHR-SeqSQL (Ryu et al., 2024)
PRACTIQ (Dong et al., 2025)
Tau-Bench (Yao et al., 2025)
ToolDial (Shim et al., 2025)
MedAgentBench (Jiang et al., 2025)
MedAgentGym (Xu et al., 2025)
EHR-ChatQA (Ours)

Conversational Ability
User Multi-turn Query Ambiguity
Г—
Г—
вң“
Г—
вң“
вң“
Г—
Г—
Г—
Г—
Г—
Г—
вң“
Г—
вң“
в–і
вң“
вң“
вң“
вң“
Г—
Г—
Г—
Г—
вң“
вң“

Tool-Using Ability
Tool Use Value Explor.
Г—
Г—
Г—
Г—
Г—
Г—
Г—
Г—
Г—
Г—
вң“
Г—
Г—
Г—
Г—
Г—
вң“
Г—
вң“
Г—
вң“
Г—
вң“
Г—
вң“
вң“

Domain
EHR
Г—
Г—
Г—
вң“
Г—
Г—
вң“
Г—
Г—
Г—
вң“
вң“
вң“

ground-truth (GT) and r = 0 otherwise. In our evaluation, the reward is assigned in a rule-based
manner against deterministic GT SQL queries and answers (see Appendix A.6 for details).
3.2

B ENCHMARK C OMPONENTS

Task Instances and EHR Databases Each task instance defines a unique interactive QA scenario, containing a user instruction that specifies the LLM-based userвҖҷs query goal and outlines the
intended conversation flow (e.g., вҖңYou want to know the number of patients prescribed Lopressor...
If no patients are found, you want to count the patients for its generic equivalent...вҖқ). Each instance
also includes the answer to the interaction goal and the GT SQL queries for evaluation purposes.
All user instructions and answers are grounded in patient data stored in two EHR database schemas
(MIMIC-IV and eICU), and clinical knowledge is essential for locating, filtering, and reasoning over
the retrieved information. The benchmark consists of 366 task instances, distributed across the two
databases and the two interaction flows, as shown in Table 2.
Tools Default tools provided in this benchmark include functionalities for schema exploration (table search, column search), value exploration (value substring search,
value similarity search2 ), external knowledge retrieval (web search), and final query
execution (sql execute). Since all SQL annotations are done using an interface restricted to
these schema and value exploration tools (see Section 4.2), they provide sufficient resources for
constructing correct SQL queries when the agent is supplemented with SQL expertise and physicianlevel clinical knowledge. The web search() tool is optionally provided to the agent to supplement or confirm clinical knowledge, as accurate handling of such knowledge is critical in the EHR
domain. More details on tool specifications are provided in Appendix A.2.
Simulated User To evaluate user interaction at scale and measure agent performance across diverse conversation paths, we use an LLM-based user simulator that leverages a certain level of
stochasticity in user utterances. We use Gemini-2.0-Flash at a temperature of 1.0. The simulated
user is initialized with a system prompt (see Appendix A.3.2) containing a user instruction and a set
of behavioral rules. These rules include intentionally starting with a vague initial query, which forces
the agent to engage in dialogue for clarification. The rules also define the conditions for ending the
conversation: either the agent successfully retrieves and provides the information requested by the
user, or the agent repeatedly fails to retrieve relevant information and shows no sign of progress
(see more details in Appendix A.3.1). To improve the simulatorвҖҷs instruction-following reliability, we employ a nested verification-reflection mechanism inspired by Shinn et al. (2023), where a
turn-level verifier (at temperature 0.0) and chained reflection loop check each response before it is
committed to the conversation (see Appendix A.3.4). Crucially, throughout this process, the user is
2

Text columns are pre-indexed. We use OpenAIвҖҷs text-embedding-3-large.

4

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

Figure 2: Example interaction trace in EHR-ChatQA (AdaptQA). Given a vague initial user question, the agent clarifies the request (1) by refining вҖңsome statisticsвҖқ into the specific goal of вҖңthe
percentage.вҖқ When the initial query yields no matching records due to a value mismatch, the user
guides the agent to search for its generic name instead (2). The agent then incorporates clinical
knowledge retrieved via web search() to reformulate the query (3), and finally executes the revised query to produce the correct answer (4).
isolated from the database content and the GT SQL and answers, preventing it from вҖңtipping offвҖқ
the agent with information they should not possess.
Simulation Validator There are occasions where LLM-based simulations deviate from the intended behavior, not because of the agentвҖҷs failure but because the user simulator itself deviates
from its instructions. To mitigate this and ensure reliable evaluation of agents, we implement an
LLM-as-a-judge classifier (Zheng et al., 2023) as a validator3 . After each completed simulation,
the validator reviews the entire dialogue trajectory. If it determines that the simulated user has violated its given instruction or rules, the simulation trace is considered invalid and subsequently rerun,
regardless of the taskвҖҷs outcome. When a user error is detected, the validatorвҖҷs error explanation
is accumulated and fed into subsequent re-runs, enabling subsequent re-runs to avoid previously
observed mistakes. The prompt used in the validator is provided in Appendix A.4.

4

B ENCHMARK C ONSTRUCTION

4.1

I NTERACTION F LOWS

To capture a wide range of query ambiguity and value mismatch patterns grounded in various clinical
QA scenarios, we include two different interaction flows for the simulated user to follow:
вҖў Incremental Query Refinement (IncreQA): This flow tests an agentвҖҷs ability to maintain
conversational context as the user incrementally constructs a query by adding new constraints toward a single linear goal. The agent must integrate new details into the existing
context without losing prior information. Examples of such constraints include specifying
event timing (e.g., вҖңdiagnosed within the past 180 daysвҖқ), narrowing to a specific patient
cohort (e.g., вҖңamong patients diagnosed with diabetesвҖқ), or adding related clinical criteria
(e.g., вҖңwho did not have an HbA1c test recordedвҖқ) (see Appendix A.1.1 for a sample task
instance).
вҖў Adaptive Query Refinement (AdaptQA): Unlike IncreQAвҖҷs linear goal structure, this
flow tests an agentвҖҷs ability to adapt its query plan at conditional branching points, where
3

We use Gemini-2.5-Flash at a temperature of 0.0.

5

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

Table 2: EHR-ChatQA task statistics. вӢҶ indicates preprocessed databases with renamed schemas.

MIMIC-IVвӢҶ
eICUвӢҶ
Total

IncreQA
145
141
286

AdaptQA
40
40
80

Total
185
181
366

the userвҖҷs next question depends on the agentвҖҷs intermediate response (e.g., searching for
a medication within the same or different drug classes if the initially requested one is
not found, rolling back when partial information is missing, or adopting fallback strategies when no relevant data is available). By design, these tasks require more advanced
value mismatch resolution than IncreQA, often going beyond synonym matching (see Appendix A.1.2).
4.2

A NNOTATION P ROCESS

A core team of three annotators (two graduate-level computer science students and one physician)
led the initial development, from drafting through internal quality checks. This phase was followed
by beta testing with 38 graduate-level contributors, whose feedback informed the final revisions.
4.2.1

EHR DATABASES

To evaluate agentsвҖҷ generalizability to different EHR structures, we use two publicly available EHR
databases with distinct schemas and data recording practices: MIMIC-IV (Johnson et al., 2023),
which contains detailed ICU data from Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, and eICU (Pollard
et al., 2018), which includes ICU data from multiple U.S. hospitals. For instance, eICU stores prescription records as a single string such as вҖңclopidogrel bisulfate 75 mg po tabs,вҖқ whereas MIMIC-IV
splits it across separate columns (drug name, dosage, unit of measurement) as вҖңclopidogrel,вҖқ вҖң75.0,вҖқ
and вҖңmg.вҖқ As the basis for our task instances, we use a subset of records from the privacy-safe
demo versions of these databases. Although they contain fewer patients, these demos retain the
same schema complexity as the originals.4
A key challenge we identified is that SOTA LLMs often memorize the original schemas of these
popular databases, allowing them to generate SQL without genuine schema exploration. To ensure
that our evaluation truly tests an agentвҖҷs ability to navigate arbitrary databases, we rename all table
and column names (e.g., вҖңpatientsвҖқ to вҖңdemographicsвҖқ). The resulting databases, MIMIC-IVвӢҶ and
eICUвӢҶ, compel agents to rely on schema exploration tools rather than their prior knowledge. Further
details on this process are provided in Appendix B.4.
4.2.2

I NCRE QA A NNOTATION

To create IncreQA tasks, we first curate and adapt clinically relevant queries from two primary
sources: the EHRSQL dataset (Lee et al., 2022) and internal logs from our collaborating medical
center. We then annotate the corresponding GT SQL queries and answers. Next, we convert these
SQL queries into narrative user instructions using a SQL-to-text approach. By grounding each
instruction in a specific SQL constraint, we minimize the ambiguity inherent in natural language.
For example, вҖңHow many emergency patients are there?вҖқ is ambiguous (admission type=вҖҳurgentвҖҷ
vs. admit source=вҖҳemergency roomвҖҷ), but an instruction derived from WHERE admit source =
вҖҳemergency roomвҖҷ is not. We manually review the resulting instructions to detect any missing SQL
details or residual ambiguities. Finally, we rephrase database values into everyday language to
introduce value mismatch challenges (e.g., mapping вҖңmalignant neoplasmвҖқ to вҖңcancerвҖқ). Details of
the IncreQA annotation process are provided in Appendix B.1.1.
4
The annotated SQL queries and GT answers are tailored to the demo databases; running them on the full
versions may yield different results due to differences in patient populations and record counts.

6

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

Model

SR-5 (вҶ‘)

Gemini-2.5-Flash
Gemini-2.0-Flash
o4-mini
GPT-4o
GPT-4o-mini

73.3
59.4
81.3
64.5
47.8

Llama 3.3-70B
Qwen3-32B

40.5
58.7

IncreQA
Pass@5 (вҶ‘) PassвҲ§ 5 (вҶ‘) Gap-5 (вҶ“) SR-5 (вҶ‘)
Closed-source Models
91.3
47.6
43.7
30.0
83.9
29.0
54.9
16.2
96.5
57.7
38.8
35.8
87.1
35.3
51.8
28.5
73.8
21.3
52.5
19.0
Open-source Models
68.9
16.4
52.5
14.2
87.4
25.5
61.9
21.2

AdaptQA
Pass@5 (вҶ‘) PassвҲ§ 5 (вҶ‘)

Gap-5 (вҶ“)

65.0
40.0
66.2
53.8
40.0

3.8
2.5
7.5
11.2
3.8

61.2
37.5
58.7
42.6
36.2

41.2
50.0

1.2
2.5

40.0
47.5

Table 3: Overall results on EHR-ChatQA across two different interaction flows: Incremental
Query Refinement (IncreQA) and Adaptive Query Refinement (AdaptQA), averaged over combined
MIMIC-IVвӢҶ and eICUвӢҶ samples. Metrics include: SR-5 (average success rate over 5 trials), Pass@5
(success in at least one of 5 trials), PassвҲ§ 5 (success in all 5 trials), and Gap-5 (Pass@5 - PassвҲ§ 5).
4.2.3

A DAPT QA A NNOTATION

AdaptQA tasks focus on scenarios requiring goal adjustments during interaction. Unlike IncreQA,
we begin by defining eight query modification categories (Table 10) representing adjustments due
to data absence or schema structures. A key design principle is that each instruction must withhold
information that the agent is expected to discover on its own. This enforces a deterministic, decisiontree-like workflow where the userвҖҷs next action depends on the agentвҖҷs intermediate response. We
then annotate instructions that implement these conditional workflows based on specific patient data
or database structures. For instance, to create a task in the вҖңbrand-generic name resolutionвҖқ category,
we select a patient lacking records for a brand-name drug (e.g., Lipitor) but having records for its
generic equivalent (e.g., atorvastatin). The instruction directs the user to ask for the brand name
first and, upon failure, to check for the generic name. Crucially, the user in the interaction does not
know the underlying database state, so the agent must first report the absence of the brand-name
record and then, when the user follows up, map the brand name to its generic counterpart using
clinical knowledge that the user does not explicitly provide. Following physician verification of
these logical flows, we annotate the corresponding GT SQL queries and answers. Details of the
AdaptQA annotation process are provided in Appendix B.1.2.
4.3

Q UALITY A SSURANCE

Our quality assurance procedure consists of an internal validation process followed by an external
beta-testing phase. The internal validation targets both task instances and the simulation environment. For task instances, we employ an iterative refinement loop: preliminary simulations flag tasks
that repeatedly cause agent failures for manual review, which focuses on the alignment between
annotated SQL and user instructions and on resolving any residual ambiguities. For the simulation
environment, we manually review failed dialogue trajectories, especially the agentвҖҷs value-linking
logic (e.g., when a user instruction specifies hemoglobin, we check whether the instruction is clear
enough to guide only to вҖңHb,вҖқ not to other similar terms such as вҖңHb CвҖқ). Following this internal validation, the benchmark underwent beta testing over two months with 38 graduate-level contributors,
whose feedback on instruction clarity and user behavior informed the final revisions. The contributor demographics and testing details are provided in Appendix A.7. The validatorвҖҷs reliability is
further verified through manual inspection (Appendix A.4.1).

5

E XPERIMENTS

5.1

E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Models We evaluate leading closed-source and open-source LLMs with strong function-calling
capabilities5 . For closed-source models, we use OpenAIвҖҷs o4-mini, GPT-4o, and GPT-4o-mini,
5
We use a standard function-calling setup with a shared system prompt and identical tool definitions as a
uniform baseline for all models, rather than optimizing agent architectures for peak performance.

7

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

as well as GoogleвҖҷs Gemini-2.5-Flash and Gemini-2.0-Flash. For open-source models, we evaluate Llama 3.3-70B and Qwen3-32B, served on four NVIDIA A6000 GPUs using the vLLM library (Kwon et al., 2023). All implemented agents are provided with a set of behavioral rules (see
Appendix C.2), database-specific SQL generation rules (see Appendix A.5), and evaluation rules
(see Appendix A.6). The temperature for all agent LLMs is set to 0.0, meaning that performance
variation across trials for the same task arises solely from the stochasticity of the LLM-based user
simulator (temperature 1.0). Each simulation is limited to a maximum of 30 agent actions. The
agent implementation details are provided in Appendix C.
Evaluation Metrics We evaluate agent performance using four metrics: SR-k, Pass@k, PassвҲ§ k,
and Gap-k. SR-k measures the average success rate across k i.i.d. trials for each task. Pass@k (Chen
et al., 2021), representing an agentвҖҷs optimistic performance, is the proportion of tasks solved in at
least one of these k trials. Conversely, PassвҲ§ k (Yao et al., 2025) assesses consistent and reliable
performance by measuring the proportion of tasks solved in all k trials. The final metric, Gap-k,
is the difference between Pass@k and PassвҲ§ k. While SR-k serves as a stable measure of overall
performance due to its lower sensitivity to the number of trials, k, the other three metrics vary
with k. In particular, Gap-k indicates an agentвҖҷs robustness across diverse conversation paths and is
an important indicator of potential degradation in performance over multiple runs, which must be
avoided in the safety-critical EHR domain. We set k=5 throughout the experiments.
5.2

M AIN R ESULTS

Overall Result Table 3 summarizes the performance of various state-of-the-art LLMs on EHRChatQA. Closed-source models generally outperform their open-source counterparts. In terms of
SR-5, o4-mini achieves the highest overall performance, with scores of 81.3% on IncreQA and
35.8% on AdaptQA, followed by Gemini-2.5-Flash. Open-source models such as Llama 3.3-70B
and Qwen3-32B show clear limitations, particularly struggling with AdaptQA (14.2% and 21.2%
SR-5, respectively). While the top closed-source models perform strongly on IncreQA, with SR-5
scores of up to 81%, their performance drops to the 16вҖ“36% range on AdaptQA. This indicates
that AdaptQA requires more advanced adaptive query refinement and sophisticated value exploration. The most salient finding is the substantial discrepancy between the optimistic performance
(Pass@5) and the consistent performance (PassвҲ§ 5). For instance, o4-miniвҖҷs Gap-5 reaches 38.8%
on IncreQA and 58.7% on AdaptQA, indicating that even the best-performing agent lacks the consistency required for safety-critical deployment.
Interaction and Cost Analysis Averaged across all models and trials, agents engage in 5.5 user
interactions and 7.8 tool interactions per IncreQA task, and 5.8 and 12.1 per AdaptQA task, respectively, indicating greater complexity for AdaptQA. The environment setup, which employs a
simulated user and validator, costs approximately $0.004 per IncreQA task and $0.007 per AdaptQA task. The total cost of running the full benchmark over five runs, using o4-mini as the database
agent, is approximately $95 across all task instances, whereas the cost using Gemini-2.5-Flash is
about $52.
Further Performance Analysis A deeper analysis of the top model, o4-mini, reveals key factors
behind its performance inconsistency. As expected, Gap-k widens with more trials (k), since the
condition for consistent success becomes stricter (Figure 3a). Furthermore, trials involving more
user interactions tend to have lower overall success rates as well as higher inconsistency (Figure 3b).
This trend holds even for individual trials, where a trialвҖҷs success is negatively correlated with its
relative number of user-agent interactions even within the same task (Figure 3c).
5.3

C OMMON E RROR C ASES IN I NTERACTIVE DATABASE AGENTS

We conduct a detailed error analysis by manually inspecting failed trajectories from o4-mini and
Gemini-2.5-Flash across both IncreQA and AdaptQA to understand the root causes of failures and
the factors driving the performance gap. We categorize failures into two distinct groups: (1) Consistent Failures, where the agent fails across all five trials, indicating fundamental limitations; and
(2) Inconsistent Failures, where the agent succeeds in at least one trial but not all, highlighting
brittleness to variations in conversation paths.
8

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

(b) Pass@5, PassвҲ§ 5, and Gap-5 by user interaction
length.

(a) Performance vs. number of trials (k).

(c) Success rate by user interaction length (IncreQA vs.
AdaptQA).

Figure 3: Detailed performance of the o4-mini-powered agent.
Consistent Failures Consistent failures are dominated by difficulties in handling value mismatch
and in generating complex SQL. The largest category, Value Linking Errors (51.9%), arises when
an agent fails to retrieve all relevant database terms. This includes overlooking drug brand names
(e.g., вҖңCoumadinвҖқ for warfarin), failing to match textual variations (e.g., finding вҖңessential (primary)
hypertensionвҖқ), and being unable to resolve synonyms or abbreviations (e.g., вҖңwbcвҖқ for вҖңwhite blood
cellsвҖқ and вҖңleukocytesвҖқ). The second major category, SQL Generation Errors (25.9%), involves
subtle yet critical flaws in query logic. For instance, agents often misinterpret the timing of events,
querying a patientвҖҷs overall first hospital visit instead of their first visit for a specific diagnosis.
The remaining failures include Limited Clinical Knowledge (14.8%), such as failing to identify
cardiovascular complications after a surgical procedure, and Rule Violations (7.4%), where agents
disregard explicit scope constraints like querying all admissions instead of only the current hospital
stay.
Inconsistent Failures Inconsistent failures reveal the fragility of current agents. Small variations
in the dialogue trajectory, stemming from stochastic user responses, can lead to drastically different
outcomes. The dominant category, SQL Generation Issues (75.0%), arises when slight variations in
user phrasing disrupt the agentвҖҷs context tracking, leading to SQL that omits crucial context from
previous turnsвҖ”the same context handled correctly in successful trials. For instance, in an IncreQA
task, a user might first ask for вҖңpatients with diabetesвҖқ. In a successful trial, the follow-up вҖңHow
many of those are over 65?вҖқ correctly maintains both constraints. However, in a failed trial, a subtle
rephrasing such as вҖңAnd what about their age, specifically over 65?вҖқ can cause the agent to drop
the initial вҖңdiabetesвҖқ constraint, erroneously querying the age of the entire patient population. The
remaining errors include incomplete value retrieval (15.0%), limited clinical knowledge (5.0%), and
occasional rule violations (5.0%).
Diagnostic Insights To address consistent failures, which are largely driven by value mismatch,
future work should improve the agentвҖҷs exploration strategies. Agents must comprehensively find
relevant database entries. To mitigate the performance gap across multiple runs reflected in inconsistent failures, the priority should be to improve context management. This requires developing
techniques that enforce state-tracking consistency across linguistic variations, such as explicit query
state representation or specialized fine-tuning focused on context-dependent query refinement.

6

C HALLENGES IN S IMULATION -BASED E VALUATION

Simulation-based benchmarks present unique challenges due to the stochastic nature of LLMgenerated dialogues. In our experiments, the common error types that cause simulation re-runs
include: omitting conditions (41.8%), where users fail to provide specific details before concluding
9

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

the conversation; premature ending (19.5%), where users send the termination signal before revealing all the necessary information specified in the instruction6 ; instruction deviation (15.6%), where
users perform actions not specified in the instruction; conversation style violations (15.4%), such
as using AI-like phrases or revealing all goals at once; and other miscellaneous errors (7.7%), such
as knowledge leakage or incorrect value confirmation. Despite careful instruction design and our
nested verification-reflection mechanism, many cost-effective LLMs, including open-source models and Gemini-2.0-Flash, are not yet fully reliable at following detailed or unfamiliar instructions.
In particular, correcting one error type through reflection can introduce a different one, as simultaneously satisfying multiple constraints often exceeds the instruction-following capacity of current
models. We expect this limitation to diminish as more powerful and cost-effective LLMs become
available for use in user simulation.

7

C ONCLUSION

We introduce EHR-ChatQA, the first conversational benchmark for end-to-end evaluation of
database agents in the safety-critical EHR domain. Moving beyond static text-to-SQL, EHRChatQA assesses an agentвҖҷs ability to resolve query ambiguity and value mismatch through user
conversation and active tool use. Our evaluation of state-of-the-art LLMs on two interaction flows,
Incremental (IncreQA) and Adaptive (AdaptQA), reveals a critical robustness gap: the difference
between succeeding in one of five independent trials (Pass@5) and all five (PassвҲ§ 5) exceeds 38% on
IncreQA and 36% on AdaptQA, reaching up to about 60%. This gap is mainly rooted in the agentвҖҷs
failures in accurate context management and SQL generation. We believe EHR-ChatQA can serve
as a valuable resource for advancing database agents in interactive question answering over EHRs.

8

E THICS S TATEMENT

We adhere to the ICLR Code of Ethics and prioritize ethical considerations in this research. To protect patient privacy, EHR-ChatQA utilizes publicly available, de-identified EHR datasets (MIMICIV-demo and eICU-demo), which are free of Protected Health Information (PHI), allowing for the
safe evaluation of LLMs. Our findings highlight a significant performance gap in current stateof-the-art models between optimistic and consistent agent performances across QA tasks, raising
concerns about the premature deployment of these agents in safety-critical clinical environments.
We also acknowledge that the source EHR databases may contain inherent biases reflecting the
demographics and clinical practices of the originating U.S. hospitals.

9

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

To ensure the reproducibility of our experiments, we provide comprehensive resources, including
the complete EHR-ChatQA benchmark with all 366 task instances and the EHR databases, an evaluation framework, a tool suite, and a simulation environment, which will be available in our GitHub
repository. Detailed methodologies are provided in the appendices, covering database preprocessing
and schema renaming (Appendix B.4), implementation details for the simulated user and validator
(Appendix A.3), and the implementation of the database agents (Appendix C). Due to the stochasticity of the simulated users, the exact numbers reported in the experiments may not be perfectly
reproduced, and occasional user-side errors may persist as these LLMs are not perfectly instructionfollowing. However, we have introduced a simulation validator to mitigate such issues, and we
expect that their occurrence will decrease as LLM steerability continues to improve.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Institute of Information & Communications Technology Planning
& Evaluation (IITP) grants (No.RS-2019-II190075, No.RS-2025-02304967), the Korea Health Industry Development Institute (KHIDI) grant (No.RS-2025-02213750, No.RS-2025-02223382), and
National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant (NRF-2020H1D3A2A03100945), funded by
the Korea government (MSIT, MOHW).
6
This termination rule is intentionally included in user instructions to prevent open-ended questions from
excessively deviating and leading to non-terminating conversations.

10

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

R EFERENCES
PaweЕӮ Budzianowski, Tsung-Hsien Wen, Bo-Hsiang Tseng, InМғigo Casanueva, Stefan Ultes, Osman
Ramadan, and Milica Gasic. Multiwoz-a large-scale multi-domain wizard-of-oz dataset for taskoriented dialogue modelling. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, pp. 5016вҖ“5026, 2018.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde De Oliveira Pinto, Jared
Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evaluating large
language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021.
Blanda Helena De Mello, Sandro JoseМҒ Rigo, Cristiano AndreМҒ Da Costa, Rodrigo da Rosa Righi,
Bruna Donida, Marta Rosecler Bez, and Luana Carina Schunke. Semantic interoperability in
health records standards: a systematic literature review. Health and technology, 12(2):255вҖ“272,
2022.
Mingwen Dong, Nischal Ashok Kumar, Yiqun Hu, Anuj Chauhan, Chung-Wei Hang, Shuaichen
Chang, Lin Pan, Wuwei Lan, Henghui Zhu, Jiarong Jiang, Patrick Ng, and Zhiguo Wang. PRACTIQ: A practical conversational text-to-SQL dataset with ambiguous and unanswerable queries.
In Luis Chiruzzo, Alan Ritter, and Lu Wang (eds.), Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of
the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 255вҖ“273, Albuquerque, New Mexico, April 2025. Association for Computational Linguistics. ISBN 979-8-89176-189-6. URL
https://aclanthology.org/2025.naacl-long.13/.
John H Holmes, James Beinlich, Mary R Boland, Kathryn H Bowles, Yong Chen, Tessa S Cook,
George Demiris, Michael Draugelis, Laura Fluharty, Peter E Gabriel, et al. Why is the electronic
health record so challenging for research and clinical care? Methods of information in medicine,
60(01/02):032вҖ“048, 2021.
Yixing Jiang, Kameron C Black, Gloria Geng, Danny Park, Andrew Y Ng, and Jonathan H Chen.
Medagentbench: Dataset for benchmarking llms as agents in medical applications. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2501.14654, 2025.
Alistair EW Johnson, Lucas Bulgarelli, Lu Shen, Alvin Gayles, Ayad Shammout, Steven Horng,
Tom J Pollard, Sicheng Hao, Benjamin Moody, Brian Gow, et al. Mimic-iv, a freely accessible
electronic health record dataset. Scientific data, 10(1):1, 2023.
Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E.
Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. Efficient memory management for large language model
serving with pagedattention. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 29th Symposium on Operating
Systems Principles, 2023.
Gyubok Lee, Hyeonji Hwang, Seongsu Bae, Yeonsu Kwon, Woncheol Shin, Seongjun Yang, Minjoon Seo, Jong-Yeup Kim, and Edward Choi. Ehrsql: A practical text-to-sql benchmark for
electronic health records. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:15589вҖ“15601,
2022.
Jinyang Li, Binyuan Hui, Ge Qu, Binhua Li, Jiaxi Yang, Bowen Li, Bailin Wang, Bowen Qin,
Rongyu Cao, Ruiying Geng, Nan Huo, Xuanhe Zhou, Chenhao Ma, Guoliang Li, Kevin ChenChuan Chang, Fei Huang, Reynold Cheng, and Yongbin Li. Can llm already serve as a database
interface? a big bench for large-scale database grounded text-to-sqls. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, volume 36, 2023.
Xiao Liu, Hao Yu, Hanchen Zhang, Yifan Xu, Xuanyu Lei, Hanyu Lai, Yu Gu, Hangliang Ding,
Kaiwen Men, Kejuan Yang, et al. Agentbench: Evaluating llms as agents. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations.
Lucila Ohno-Machado. Realizing the full potential of electronic health records: the role of natural
language processing. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 18(5):539вҖ“539,
2011.
11

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

Tom J Pollard, Alistair EW Johnson, Jesse D Raffa, Leo A Celi, Roger G Mark, and Omar Badawi.
The eicu collaborative research database, a freely available multi-center database for critical care
research. Scientific data, 5(1):1вҖ“13, 2018.
Abhinav Rastogi, Xiaoxue Zang, Srinivas Sunkara, Raghav Gupta, and Pranav Khaitan. Towards
scalable multi-domain conversational agents: The schema-guided dialogue dataset. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 34, pp. 8689вҖ“8696, 2020.
Jaehee Ryu, Seonhee Cho, Gyubok Lee, and Edward Choi. Ehr-seqsql : A sequential text-tosql dataset for interactively exploring electronic health records. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024, pp. 16388вҖ“16407, Bangkok, Thailand, 2024.
Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.findings-acl.971. URL
https://aclanthology.org/2024.findings-acl.971/.
Irina Saparina and Mirella Lapata. Ambrosia: A benchmark for parsing ambiguous questions into
database queries. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:90600вҖ“90628, 2024.
Ivan SekulicМҒ, Silvia Terragni, Victor GuimaraМғes, Nghia Khau, Bruna Guedes, Modestas Filipavicius,
AndreМҒ Ferreira Manso, and Roland Mathis. Reliable llm-based user simulator for task-oriented
dialogue systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.13374, 2024.
Jeonghoon Shim, Gyuhyeon Seo, Cheongsu Lim, and Yohan Jo. Tooldial: Multi-turn dialogue
generation method for tool-augmented language models. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
J1J5eGJsKZ.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion:
Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 36:8634вҖ“8652, 2023.
Bing Wang, Yan Gao, Zhoujun Li, and Jian-Guang Lou. Know what I donвҖҷt know: Handling
ambiguous and unknown questions for text-to-SQL. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber,
and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL
2023, pp. 5701вҖ“5714, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.findings-acl.352. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.
findings-acl.352.
Ping Wang, Tian Shi, and Chandan K Reddy. Text-to-sql generation for question answering on
electronic medical records. In Proceedings of The Web Conference 2020, pp. 350вҖ“361, 2020.
xAI. Grok 3 beta вҖ” the age of reasoning agents. https://x.ai/news/grok-3, February
2025. Accessed: 2025-09-20.
Ran Xu, Yuchen Zhuang, Yishan Zhong, Yue Yu, Xiangru Tang, Hang Wu, May D Wang, Peifeng
Ruan, Donghan Yang, Tao Wang, et al. Medagentgym: Training llm agents for code-based medical reasoning at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.04405, 2025.
Xi Yang, Aokun Chen, Nima PourNejatian, Hoo Chang Shin, Kaleb E Smith, Christopher Parisien,
Colin Compas, Cheryl Martin, Anthony B Costa, Mona G Flores, et al. A large language model
for electronic health records. NPJ digital medicine, 5(1):194, 2022.
Shunyu Yao, Howard Chen, John Yang, and Karthik Narasimhan. Webshop: Towards scalable
real-world web interaction with grounded language agents. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:20744вҖ“20757, 2022.
Shunyu Yao, Noah Shinn, Pedram Razavi, and Karthik Narasimhan. П„ -bench: A benchmark for
tool-agent-user interaction in real-world domains. In The Twelfth International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2025.
Tao Yu, Rui Zhang, Kai Yang, Michihiro Yasunaga, Dongxu Wang, Zifan Li, James Ma, Irene
Li, Qingning Yao, Shanelle Roman, Zilin Zhang, and Dragomir Radev. Spider: A large-scale
human-labeled dataset for complex and cross-domain semantic parsing and text-to-sql task. In
Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp.
3911вҖ“3921, Brussels, Belgium, 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/
v1/D18-1425. URL https://aclanthology.org/D18-1425/.
12

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

Tao Yu, Rui Zhang, Heyang Er, Suyi Li, Eric Xue, Bo Pang, Xi Victoria Lin, Yi Chern Tan,
Tianze Shi, Zihan Li, Youxuan Jiang, Michihiro Yasunaga, Sungrok Shim, Tao Chen, Alexander Fabbri, Zifan Li, Luyao Chen, Yuwen Zhang, Shreya Dixit, Vincent Zhang, Caiming Xiong,
Richard Socher, Walter Lasecki, and Dragomir Radev. CoSQL: A conversational text-to-SQL
challenge towards cross-domain natural language interfaces to databases. In Kentaro Inui, Jing
Jiang, Vincent Ng, and Xiaojun Wan (eds.), Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 1962вҖ“1979, Hong Kong, China, November 2019a. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1204. URL
https://aclanthology.org/D19-1204/.
Tao Yu, Rui Zhang, Michihiro Yasunaga, Yi Chern Tan, Xi Victoria Lin, Suyi Li, Heyang Er,
Irene Li, Bo Pang, Tao Chen, Emily Ji, Shreya Dixit, David Proctor, Sungrok Shim, Jonathan
Kraft, Vincent Zhang, Caiming Xiong, Richard Socher, and Dragomir Radev. SParC: Crossdomain semantic parsing in context. In Anna Korhonen, David Traum, and LluДұМҒs MaМҖrquez
(eds.), Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4511вҖ“4523, Florence, Italy, July 2019b. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
10.18653/v1/P19-1443. URL https://aclanthology.org/P19-1443/.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, et al. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and
chatbot arena. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:46595вҖ“46623, 2023.

13

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

S UPPLEMENTARY C ONTENTS
A Benchmark Details

16

A.1 Sample Task Instances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

16

A.1.1 IncreQA Sample . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

16

A.1.2 AdaptQA Sample . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

16

A.2 Tool Specifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

18

A.3 User Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

19

A.3.1 Simulated User . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

19

A.3.2 User System Prompt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

19

A.3.3 Example Variability in Simulated User Turns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

20

A.3.4 Nested Verification-Reflection Mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

21

A.4 Simulation Validator Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

22

A.4.1 Validator Reliability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

22

A.5 Database-Specific Rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

24

A.5.1 MIMIC-IVвӢҶ Rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

24

A.5.2 eICUвӢҶ Rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

25

A.6 Evaluation Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

26

A.6.1 IncreQA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

26

A.6.2 AdaptQA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

26

A.7 Contributor Demographics and Beta Testing Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

26

B Annotation Details

27

B.1 IncreQA and AdaptQA Annotation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

27

B.1.1

IncreQA Annotation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

27

B.1.2

AdaptQA Annotation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

27

B.2 AdaptQA Categories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

28

B.3 SQL Annotation Style . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

29

B.4 EHR Database Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

30

B.4.1

MIMIC-IV Renaming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

30

B.4.2

eICU Renaming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

31

C Agent Implementation

32

C.1 Agent System Prompt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

32

C.2 Agent Rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

32

C.3 Agent Rules for Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

33

D Sample Trajectories

34

D.1 Incremental Query Refinement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

34

D.1.1 Successful Case (IncreQA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

34

14

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

D.1.2 Failed Case (IncreQA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

38

D.2 Adaptive Query Refinement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

44

D.2.1 Successful Case (AdaptQA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

44

D.2.2 Failed Case (AdaptQA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

49

D.3 Invalidated Trajectories by the Validator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

59

D.3.1 Violation of No Final Check Rule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

59

D.3.2 Violation of Missing conditions Rule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

59

D.3.3 Violation of Performing Agent-like Tasks Rule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

60

15

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

A

B ENCHMARK D ETAILS

A.1

S AMPLE TASK I NSTANCES

In this section, we present sample task instances for IncreQA and AdaptQA.
A.1.1

I NCRE QA S AMPLE

{
вҖқtask idвҖқ: вҖқ6вҖқ,
вҖқtask typeвҖқ: вҖқincreвҖқ,
вҖқdb idвҖқ: вҖқmimic iv starвҖқ,
вҖқinstructionвҖқ:
вҖқYour goal is to find the number of patients admitted to the hospital who meet
specific criteria. Specifically, you want to know how many patients admitted in the
past 90 days have a family history of breast cancer.вҖқ,
вҖқgold sqlвҖқ:
вҖқSELECT COUNT(DISTINCT ha.patientid) AS patient count FROM hospitaladmissions
ha JOIN admissiondiagnoses ad ON ha.admissionid = ad.admissionid JOIN
diagnosiscodes dc ON ad.icdcode = dc.icdcode AND ad.codeversion = dc.
codeversion WHERE dc.description = вҖҷfamily history of malignant neoplasm of
breastвҖҷ AND datetime(ha.admitdatetime) >= datetime(вҖҷ2100вҲ’12вҲ’31 23:59:00вҖҷ, вҖҷвҲ’90
daysвҖҷ)вҖқ,
вҖқgold answerвҖқ: [[1]]
}

A.1.2

A DAPT QA S AMPLE

{
вҖқtask idвҖқ: вҖқ12вҖқ,
вҖқtask typeвҖқ: вҖқadaptвҖқ,
вҖқdb idвҖқ: вҖқmimic iv starвҖқ,
вҖқinstructionвҖқ:
вҖқYour goal is to explore patient data related to medication prescriptions.
Specifically, you are interested in patient ID 10008287 and want to know when they
were prescribed carbamazepine for epilepsy treatment. If the patient was
prescribed carbamazepine, you want to know the most recent prescription time
after the first epilepsy diagnosis. If the patient was not prescribed carbamazepine,
you want to identify whether any other class of medication used for epilepsy
treatment was prescribed. If such medications are found, you want to know the
most recent prescription time after the first epilepsy diagnosis. If no such
medications are found, end the conversation. You want the answer in the exact
time format recorded in the database.вҖқ,

16

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

вҖқgold sqlвҖқ:
вҖқWITH valid epilepsy codes AS ( SELECT DISTINCT d.icdcode, d.codeversion, di.
description FROM admissiondiagnoses d JOIN diagnosiscodes di ON d.icdcode = di.
icdcode AND d.codeversion = di.codeversion WHERE di.description LIKE вҖҷ%epilepsy
%вҖҷ ), epilepsy diagnoses AS ( SELECT d.patientid, MIN(d.recordeddatetime) AS
first epilepsy time FROM admissiondiagnoses d JOIN valid epilepsy codes c ON d.
icdcode = c.icdcode AND d.codeversion = c.codeversion WHERE d.patientid =
10008287 GROUP BY d.patientid ), carbamazepine prescriptions AS ( SELECT p.
patientid, p.admissionid, p.startdatetime FROM medicationorders p JOIN
epilepsy diagnoses ed ON p.patientid = ed.patientid WHERE p.medicationname = вҖҷ
carbamazepineвҖҷ AND p.startdatetime > ed.first epilepsy time ),
alternative epilepsy prescriptions AS ( SELECT p.patientid, p.admissionid, p.
startdatetime FROM medicationorders p JOIN epilepsy diagnoses ed ON p.patientid
= ed.patientid WHERE p.medicationname IN (вҖҷlevetiracetamвҖҷ, вҖҷvalproateвҖҷ, вҖҷ
topiramateвҖҷ) AND p.startdatetime > ed.first epilepsy time ),
combined prescriptions AS ( SELECT patientid, admissionid, startdatetime FROM
carbamazepine prescriptions WHERE EXISTS (SELECT 1 FROM
carbamazepine prescriptions) UNION ALL SELECT patientid, admissionid,
startdatetime FROM alternative epilepsy prescriptions WHERE NOT EXISTS (SELECT
1 FROM carbamazepine prescriptions) ) SELECT startdatetime FROM
combined prescriptions ORDER BY startdatetime DESC LIMIT 1;вҖқ,
вҖқgold answerвҖқ: [[вҖҷ2100вҲ’10вҲ’12 20:00:00вҖҷ]]
}

17

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

A.2

T OOL S PECIFICATIONS

Table 4 presents the six default tools, categorized by their purposes. These tools serve as channels
for access to database content and external clinical knowledge to solve question-answering tasks in
EHR-ChatQA. For each tool, the equals sign (=) denotes its default arguments.
Table 4: Definition of six default tools provided in EHR-ChatQA.
Tool name

Input

Output

Description

Schema exploration
table search

None

List of tables

Lists all available tables in the database.

column search

Table name

Column names with 3
sample rows

Shows the columns of a specified table along
with sample data.

value substring search

Table name, column
name, value, k=100

k values containing the
substring

Finds values that contain the specified substring
in the given column.

value similarity search

Table name, column
name, value, k=100

k similar values

Finds values similar to the input value based on
semantic similarityвҲ— .

web search

Keyword

sql execute

SQL query, k=100

Value exploration

External knowledge retrieval
Web search results

Retrieves relevant external clinical knowledge
from the web.

SQL execution
SQL result

Executes the provided SQL query and returns
up to k results.

вҲ—

For value similarity search, we use FAISS wrapped in the LangChain library. Text
columns frequently used in QA tasks are pre-indexed, as listed below (table names with their corresponding column names in brackets).
For MIMIC-IVвӢҶ, the pre-indexed columns include:
вҖў hospitaladmissions: [admissiontype, admitsource, dischargedestination]
вҖў diagnosiscodes: [description]
вҖў procedurecodes: [description]
вҖў medicationorders: [medicationname]
вҖў clinicalitemtypes: [itemname]
вҖў labtesttypes: [itemname]
вҖў microbiologyresults: [specimentype, testname, organismname]
For eICUвӢҶ, the pre-indexed columns include:
вҖў allergy reaction: [drug name, allergy name]
вҖў condition: [condition name]
вҖў fluid balance: [fluid label]
вҖў lab: [lab name]
вҖў prescription: [drug name]
вҖў icupatient: [ethnicity, hospital admission source]
вҖў treatment: [treatment name]

18

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

A.3

U SER I MPLEMENTATION

A.3.1

S IMULATED U SER

For the implementation of simulated users, we use Gemini-2.0-Flash due to its low cost and effective
instruction-following capabilities. To simulate user stochasticity in natural language utterances,
the temperature of the user simulator is set to 1.0. Table 5 shows the system prompt for the user
simulator.
A.3.2

U SER S YSTEM P ROMPT
Table 5: User system prompt to teach behavioral rules.

Your task is to simulate a user with no knowledge of SQL or database
management systems, who needs specific information from an EHR
database and relies on the DB agent for help.
Instruction: {user_instruction}
Rules:
- The current time is 2100-12-31 23:59:00.
- Start with a short, broad question that reflects the overall goals
from the instruction.
- Use your own words to describe your goals for the DB agent.
- Do not reveal all your goals at once. Instead, share them
gradually, one or two sentences at a time.
- Speak casually and directly, without functionally unnecessary
phrases (like "please" or "thank you") that make the tone sound like
an AI assistant.
- Do not generate SQL, code snippets, empty messages, or AIassistant-like outputs. Stay in the role of a user, not a DB agent.
- If the DB agent requests specific tables or column names, instruct
it to locate them independently (unless the instruction says
otherwise).
- If the DB agent requests writing or reviewing SQL queries, or
summarizing the overall goal, instruct it to complete the task
independently.
- If the DB agent gives an intermediate answer, donвҖҷt complete it
yourself. Instead, instruct it to finalize it (e.g., performing
calculations like time differences or rephrasing answers).
- If the DB agentвҖҷs answer seems satisfactory (even though you do
not know whether it is correct or whether the requested data
actually exists), ask the DB agent to double check that their final
answer covers all goals raised. If not, request any missing parts.
- If the DB agentвҖҷs answer covers all goals raised, generate only
"###END###" to end the conversation. Do not add it after every reply
. Use it only once in the final message.
- Do not deviate from what is specified in the instruction, such as
failing to mention the top N ranked tied results to retrieve,
requesting medication order records or prescription records instead
of administered records, requesting 6 months of data instead of 180
days, asking follow-up questions when they are not specified in the
instruction, or revealing disallowed information before the DB agent
mentions it.

19

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

A.3.3

E XAMPLE VARIABILITY IN S IMULATED U SER T URNS

Using the annotated user instructions and the user system prompt in Table 5, the LLM-powered
user generates diverse dialogue trajectories with the agent even under the same instruction. Figure 4
shows sample variability in user turns for both IncreQA and AdaptQA.

(a) IncreQA

(b) AdaptQA

Figure 4: Distribution of the difference between the maximum and minimum number of user turns
for each unique task in IncreQA and AdaptQA. A unique task is defined by db id, task type,
and task id. Most tasks have a difference of 1 to 3 turns, which indicates that the user simulator
generates stochastic conversations rather than fixed scripts.

20

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

A.3.4

N ESTED V ERIFICATION -R EFLECTION M ECHANISM

To improve the reliability of the simulated user, we employ a two-level nested mechanism that
operates at both the turn level and the conversation level. After the user LLM generates a candidate response for each turn, an inline verifierвҖ”a separate LLM call at temperature 0.0вҖ”evaluates
whether the response adheres to the given instruction and behavioral rules. If the verifier rejects the
response, a chained reflection loop is triggered: a reflection LLM generates a revised response along
with an explanation of the identified issue, and the verifier re-evaluates the revision. This process
repeats iteratively, with each iteration receiving the previous iterationвҖҷs output as input, enabling
progressive refinement. When the simulation validator (Appendix A.4) detects a user error after the
conversation concludes, its explanation is appended to an accumulated error list and injected into
both the verifier and reflection prompts as вҖңprevious user mistakesвҖқ in subsequent re-runs.

21

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

A.4

S IMULATION VALIDATOR I MPLEMENTATION

Tables 6 and 7 show the system and input prompts used by the simulation validator. If the validator
outputs вҖңuser errorвҖқ instead of вҖңno error,вҖқ the conversation is flagged and the simulation is re-run.
A.4.1

VALIDATOR R ELIABILITY

To assess the reliability of the simulation validator, we manually inspected 100 randomly sampled
trajectories. The inspection identified two types of validator errors:
вҖў False rejection (10%): Valid behaviors were incorrectly flagged. This primarily occurs
due to information asymmetry: while the user does not see the ground truth SQL, the
validator references it to check whether the user has omitted details required for accurate
SQL generation. For instance, a natural user paraphrasing (e.g., asking for вҖңhypertensionвҖқ
in general) may be flagged as a deviation if the ground truth SQL requires specific ICD
codes. These false rejections only trigger trajectory regeneration and do not affect agent
performance evaluation.
вҖў False acceptance (9%): Minor deviations were missed by the validator. Specifically, 7%
involved behavioral issues (e.g., skipping a double-check before ending the conversation)
and 2% involved edge cases in task instructions not explicitly covered by database-specific
rules. These missed errors did not involve critical failures that would compromise task
validity.
Table 6: System prompt for the simulation validator.
Your task is to determine whether [USER] accurately followed the
provided rules and user instruction during their conversation with [
DB AGENT]. Errors are defined as any deviations from the rules or
user instruction. You must carefully review the rules, user
instruction, conversation between [USER] and [DB AGENT], and the
gold SQL query to identify any errors made by [USER].

Table 7: Input prompt for the simulation validator.
{user_system_prompt}
Conversation:
{conversation}
Gold SQL:
{gold_sql}
Types of common user errors:
- The user gives away their goals all at once in the same turn.
- The user acts like a DB agent or AI assistant instead of the user
(e.g., writing, reviewing, or executing SQL queries, calling
external APIs, or responding to the DB agent in a machine assistant
way).
- The user asks for information that is slightly different from what
is specified in the instruction (e.g., requesting medication order
records or prescription records instead of administered records, or
requesting 6 months of data instead of 180 days).
- The user confirms values that differ from those in the gold SQL,
unless specified otherwise in the instruction (e.g., requesting data
for just "diabetes" when the gold SQL uses LIKE "%diabetes%").
- The user mentions information beyond the instruction, including
related or unrelated details not specified (e.g., asking follow-up
questions not in the instruction).
- The user does not provide all the detailed conditions specified in
the instruction before ending the conversation. These conditions
may include, for example, retrieving all tied ranked results,
specifying the top "N" results to retrieve, handling duplicate
patient records, or indicating keywords to include or exclude when

22

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

searching for data. However, if the DB agent retrieves no relevant
data, these conditions are not required.
- The user does not provide all the detailed conditions specified in
the predicates of the gold SQL, either explicitly or implicitly,
before ending the conversation.
- The user does not double-check with the DB agent to see if the
agentвҖҷs final answer satisfies all the information the user provided
before ending the conversation.
- The user violates any other rules specified in the rules or the
user instruction.
You must respond in JSON format with the following fields:
- explanation: Provide a clear and concise explanation of why you
made the decision.
- broken_rule: If a user error is found, provide the exact rule or
instruction that the user violated. If no error is found, provide an
empty string.
- evidence: If a user error is found, provide the exact user
response that caused the error. If no error is found, provide an
empty string.
- result: Answer "user_error" if a user error is found. Answer "
no_error" if no user error is found.

23

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

A.5

DATABASE -S PECIFIC RULES

Database-specific rules guide the agent in referencing database contents and generating SQL queries.
These rules complement the general agent rules (Section C.1), covering time-related operations,
database-specific schema structures (e.g., the hierarchy linking patient records to admission records,
and admission records to ICU records), and hints for complex numerical operations, such as survival
rate calculations. The complete database-specific rules are detailed in Sections A.5.1 and A.5.2.
A.5.1

MIMIC-IVвӢҶ RULES
Table 8: SQL assumptions for MIMIC-IVвӢҶ.

Below are the SQL generation rules:
- Use SQLite for SQL query generation.
- The current time is вҖҷ2100-12-31 23:59:00вҖҷ. When referring to time,
do not use SQLiteвҖҷs native functions like now. Instead, use
вҖҷ2100-12-31 23:59:00вҖҷ for вҖҷnowвҖҷ, вҖҷ2100-12-31вҖҷ for вҖҷtodayвҖҷ, вҖҷ2100-12вҖҷ
for вҖҷthis monthвҖҷ, and вҖҷ2100вҖҷ for вҖҷthis yearвҖҷ.
- Use DENSE_RANK() for questions involving ranked results (e.g., the
most or the top N most common/frequent events) to retrieve values
from the specified column (e.g., diagnosis names). Exclude counts or
ranks unless the user explicitly requests them. Do not use
DENSE_RANK() for questions without ranked result requests.
- For cost-related questions, use costrecords.eventtype to specify
the event type (вҖҷadmissiondiagnosesвҖҷ, вҖҷadmissionproceduresвҖҷ, вҖҷ
labresultsвҖҷ, вҖҷmedicationordersвҖҷ) when specifically retrieving costs
for diagnoses, procedures, lab results, or medications, respectively
. When retrieving costs for diagnoses, join costrecords.costid with
admissiondiagnoses.recordid. For procedures, join with
admissionprocedures.recordid. For lab results, join with labresults.
recordid. For medications, join with medicationorders.recordid.
- The medicationorders table stores ordered or prescribed
medications, while the intakerecords table records administered
drugs or fluids
- When asked to retrieve procedures, diagnoses, or lab tests, return
their names instead of their codes.
- All values stored in the database are in lowercase.
- When calculating N days ago, use datetime(вҖҷ2100-12-31 23:59:00вҖҷ,
вҖҷ-N daysвҖҷ), instead of DATE(вҖҷ2100-12-31 23:59:00вҖҷ, вҖҷ-N daysвҖҷ)
- When handling "within N days/hours," include the boundaries
inclusively.
- For questions involving the timing of diagnoses or conditions
relative to other events, you must use the first diagnosis time for
each patient unless directed otherwise.
- When searching for specific medication names in the database, use
a pattern like %morphine% instead of exact matches like morphine
unless directed otherwise.
- As clinical and lab events often share identical names but have
different codes (e.g., codes 50902 and 52535 both represent chloride
), use the names if grouping them in SQL.
- If the results contain numerical values (e.g., time differences in
days or hours, or survival rates), round them to four decimal
places.

24

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

A.5.2

E ICU вӢҶ RULES

Table 9: SQL assumptions for eICUвӢҶ.

Below are the SQL generation rules:
- Use SQLite for SQL query generation.
- The current time is вҖҷ2100-12-31 23:59:00вҖҷ. When referring to time,
do not use SQLiteвҖҷs native functions like now. Instead, use
вҖҷ2100-12-31 23:59:00вҖҷ for вҖҷnowвҖҷ, вҖҷ2100-12-31вҖҷ for вҖҷtodayвҖҷ, вҖҷ2100-12вҖҷ
for вҖҷthis monthвҖҷ, and вҖҷ2100вҖҷ for вҖҷthis yearвҖҷ.
- Use DENSE_RANK() for questions involving ranked results (e.g., the
most or the top N most common/frequent events) to retrieve values
from the specified column (e.g., diagnosis names). Exclude counts or
ranks unless the user explicitly requests them. Do not use
DENSE_RANK() for questions without ranked result requests.
- The patient identifiers patient_id, hosp_id, and unit_id represent
the unique patient ID, hospital admission ID, and ICU admission ID,
respectively. The hierarchy of them is patient -> hospital -> icu.
- When retrieving specific hospital or ICU admission records, use
their admission IDs rather than admission or discharge times.
- For cost-related questions, use cost.event_type to specify the
event type (вҖҷconditionвҖҷ, вҖҷtreatmentвҖҷ, вҖҷlabвҖҷ, вҖҷprescriptionвҖҷ) when
specifically retrieving costs for conditions, treatments, lab
results, or prescriptions, respectively. For example, when
retrieving costs for conditions, join cost.event_id with condition.
condition_id with event_type = вҖҷconditionвҖҷ.
- Use fluid_balance for both input and output events. Specify input
events using fluid_balance.fluid_path LIKE вҖҷ%intake%вҖҷ and output
events using fluid_balance.fluid_path LIKE вҖҷ%output%вҖҷ.
- The prescription table stores ordered or prescribed medications,
while the fluid_balance table records administered drugs or fluids
when fluid_balance.fluid_path LIKE вҖҷ%intake%вҖҷ.
- All values stored in the database are in lowercase.
- Patients with no records of death are considered to have survived
when dealing with death-related questions.
- When calculating N days ago, use datetime(вҖҷ2100-12-31 23:59:00вҖҷ,
вҖҷ-N daysвҖҷ), instead of DATE(вҖҷ2100-12-31 23:59:00вҖҷ, вҖҷ-N daysвҖҷ)
- When handling "within N days/hours," include the boundaries
inclusively.
- For questions involving the timing of diagnoses or conditions
relative to other events, you must use the first diagnosis time for
each patient unless directed otherwise.
- When searching for specific medication names in the database, use
a pattern like %morphine% instead of exact matches like morphine
unless directed otherwise.
- If the results contain numerical values (e.g., time differences in
days or hours, or survival rates), round them to four decimal
places.

25

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

A.6

E VALUATION D ETAILS

The evaluation methods for IncreQA and AdaptQA differ, and the appropriate method is applied
based on the interaction flow type.
A.6.1

I NCRE QA

For IncreQA tasks, we evaluate the agent by executing the SQL query it generates (parsed from the
input to the sql execute tool). We compare the resulting output to the ground truth (GT) SQL
output to ensure accuracy even for queries that return many rows. Up to 100 results are checked.
Evaluation logic: The GT SQL is constructed to satisfy all constraints introduced throughout the
interaction. Example: If a user first asks for вҖңpatients with diabetesвҖқ and then refines it to вҖңamong
them, who are over 65?вҖқ, the GT SQL filters for both conditions. If the agent executes a query
checking only for вҖңage > 65вҖқ (ignoring the diabetes context), the result will not match the GT,
leading to failure.
A.6.2

A DAPT QA

For AdaptQA tasks, correctness is evaluated based on the content within the
<answer></answer> tags of the agentвҖҷs response to the user. This method is better suited for
tasks that require clinical reasoning beyond simple SQL retrieval. For instance, after retrieving
medication data, the agent might need to identify drugs within the same class or those with similar
purposes but different mechanisms. For tasks requiring numerical answers (e.g., patient counts),
the instructions explicitly ask the agent to respond in words rather than numerals (e.g., вҖңtenвҖқ
instead of вҖң10вҖқ). This avoids false positives from numeral-word mismatches during evaluation.
Evaluation logic: Since the simulator follows a fixed procedure, the correct answer is deterministic.
We evaluate success by checking if the content within the <answer> tags strictly matches the
annotated GT answer, which reflects the userвҖҷs final intent after all refinements. Example: Consider
a user asking for вҖңAspirinвҖқ (Count: 0) and then refining to вҖңacetylsalicylic acidвҖқ (Count: 10). The
GT answer is explicitly set to вҖңtenвҖқ. If the agent answers <answer>ten</answer>, it succeeds.
If it fails to update the search term and answers вҖңzeroвҖқ, it fails.
A.7

C ONTRIBUTOR D EMOGRAPHICS AND B ETA T ESTING P ROCESS

To ensure the robustness and usability of the EHR-ChatQA benchmark, we conducted a beta-testing
phase involving 38 graduate-level contributors.
Demographics and Background The cohort consisted of MasterвҖҷs and Ph.D. students specializing in Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence. All contributors were participants in a graduatelevel course focused on Healthcare AI. Their strong technical background ensured that they effectively represented the target audience of this benchmark, namely researchers and developers of
database agents.
Training and Setup Contributors were not trained to act as simulated users but were instead
onboarded as вҖңagent developers.вҖқ To facilitate this, we provided them with a standardized development environment, which included: (1) the complete benchmark codebase and the simulation
environment, (2) detailed documentation defining the task objectives and evaluation metrics, and (3)
a baseline agent implementation to serve as a reference point for tool usage and API interaction.
Task and Feedback Mechanism Over a duration of two months, contributors were tasked with
developing and optimizing their own database agents to solve the benchmark tasks. During this
process, they were instructed to report qualitative failures in the simulation environment via Google
Form. Specifically, they identified edge cases where the LLM-based user simulator deviated from
intended behaviors, such as revealing constraints too early or terminating conversations prematurely.
Outcome This human-in-the-loop testing phase was critical for quality assurance. Based on the
reported issues, we iteratively refined the user instructions and the simulation validator to better
detect and filter out invalid dialogue traces.

26

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

B

A NNOTATION D ETAILS

B.1

I NCRE QA AND A DAPT QA A NNOTATION

Each task instance (examples in Appendix A.1) consists of an вҖңinstruction,вҖқ вҖңgold sql,вҖқ
вҖңgold answer,вҖқ and metadata (e.g., task id, db id). Below, we detail the construction pipeline for
both interaction flows.
B.1.1

I NCRE QA A NNOTATION

Source Selection IncreQA tasks are designed to mimic a user who incrementally adds constraints
through multi-turn interactions. We curate and adapt clinically relevant queries from two primary
sources: the EHRSQL dataset (Lee et al., 2022), originally collected from over 200 hospital professionals, and a set of question-SQL pairs internally stored at our collaborating medical center.
SQL/Answer Annotation After collecting a set of candidate queries, we perform value sampling
to ensure the queries return non-empty results in our specific EHR databases (MIMIC-IV and eICU
Demo). For a query like вҖңpatients diagnosed with [Diagnosis] during [Time Range],вҖқ selecting random values often yields zero results due to data sparsity. We manually explore the database to sample
valid value pairs (e.g., specific diagnosis codes and overlapping admission dates). We then use xAIвҖҷs
Grok 3 (xAI, 2025) to generate initial SQL drafts, explicitly prioritizing Common Table Expressions
(CTEs) for readability and maintainability (see Appendix B.3). Finally, we manually verify that the
SQL execution produces the intended result based on the corresponding natural language question.
The final SQL and its execution result become вҖңgold sqlвҖқ and вҖңgold answer.вҖқ
Instruction Creation Once the SQL queries are finalized, we create user instructions through a
SQL-to-text approach. This method is crucial for preserving fine-grained SQL conditions within
the narrative instructions. By decomposing complex SQL logic into discrete semantic components,
we ensure that every constraint corresponds to a specific part of the userвҖҷs goal. For example, a
SQL query containing ORDER BY charttime DESC LIMIT 1 encodes a strict operational
constraint: fetching only the latest record. A natural language question often glosses over this detail
(e.g., вҖңWhat is the patientвҖҷs creatinine level?вҖқ), which could be interpreted as requesting an average,
a full history, or the peak value. However, our approach captures this SQL operation explicitly in the
narrative: вҖңYou want to check the creatinine level. Specifically, you are interested only in the most
recent value,вҖқ reducing errors in omitting details required for the agent to generate correct SQL. We
also introduce value mismatches by manually replacing exact database values with lay terms (e.g.,
mapping вҖңmalignant neoplasm of breastвҖқ to вҖңbreast cancerвҖқ).
B.1.2

A DAPT QA A NNOTATION

Source Selection AdaptQA tasks are designed around conversational flows that mimic clinical
interactions requiring query goal adjustments. To facilitate this, we define eight categories of query
modification, including interaction flows such as resolving brand-generic name mappings (e.g.,
brand вҶ” generic) and switching a primary lab test to its clinical alternative for a condition (e.g.,
hemoglobin вҶ’ hematocrit). (see Appendix B.2 for the full list of categories).
Instruction Creation Unlike IncreQA, the annotation process for AdaptQA begins with instruction creation, followed by SQL/Answer annotation. This reverse order is necessary because AdaptQA scenarios are highly dependent on the patient data stored in the database and the database
schema. Using each of the defined categories, we prompt Grok 3 to generate various scenarios that
fit under the corresponding category. For example, for вҖңbrand-generic name resolution,вҖқ the prompt
generates instructions such as: вҖңFirst search for Lasix. If not found, pivot to search for its generic
name (Furosemide).вҖқ We then manually verify these scenarios against the actual database to find
patient records where the condition holds true (e.g., a patient who has no record for вҖңLasixвҖқ but does
have a record for вҖңFurosemideвҖқ). A physician verifies the clinical validity of these goal adjustments.
By design, these tasks require more advanced value-mismatch resolution strategies than IncreQA,
often requiring domain knowledge beyond simple synonym matching.
27

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

SQL/Answer Annotation Since AdaptQA instructions imply a conditional step-by-step flow, the
order of operations is critical. We annotate the SQL queries to reflect how a user proceeds through
the logical pivot. For logic based on data existence, we utilize conditional expressions in the GT
SQL such as EXISTS (SELECT 1 FROM lasix patients) assuming that specific CTEs
are defined. However, fully capturing the pivot logic in a single SQL statement is not always feasible.
For patterns involving schema unavailability (for example, asking for a table that does not exist) or
complex clinical reasoning that can only be inferred from the retrieved tool output, we bypass the
intermediate logical pivoting and annotate the SQL straightforwardly so that it corresponds to the
ground truth answer.
B.2

A DAPT QA C ATEGORIES
Table 10: Eight categories of query goal modification in AdaptQA.

Category

Description

Brand-generic name resolution

The user queries a medication by its brand name (e.g., Lipitor). If the database lacks records under that
name, the agent must identify and search for its generic equivalent (e.g., atorvastatin), or vice versa.
This tests the agentвҖҷs ability to resolve drug name aliases without explicit user guidance.

Within-class drug adaptation

When a specific drug is unavailable, the user adapts the search within the same therapeutic class. This
may involve expanding from a single drug to the entire class (e.g., fluoxetine вҶ’ all SSRIs), narrowing
from a broad class to a subclass, or excluding a particular medication from the class-level search.

Cross-class drug substitution

When the entire initial drug class yields no results, the userвҖҷs query broadens to a different therapeutic
class for the same condition. For instance, if no statin was prescribed for hyperlipidemia management,
the search expands to other lipid-lowering drug classes (e.g., fibrates), or if no ACE inhibitor was
found for hypertension, the search broadens to other antihypertensive classes.

Clinically related condition lookup

Starting from a primary diagnosis, procedure, or medication, the user pivots to identifying clinically related conditions when the initial query yields no results. Examples include searching for post-surgical
complications (e.g., partial hepatectomy вҶ’ pulmonary embolism), cardiovascular comorbidities of
autoimmune diseases (e.g., psoriasis вҶ’ myocardial infarction), or known side effects of a prescribed
medication.

Alternative lab test for condition

When a specific lab test is not found in the patientвҖҷs records, the agent must pivot to a clinically
equivalent alternative used to assess the same condition (e.g., troponin I вҶ’ troponin T for myocardial
damage). This mirrors clinical reasoning where a preferred diagnostic test may be unavailable.

Alternative procedure for treatment

When the primary procedure or treatment is not recorded for a patient, the user directs the search
toward an alternative clinical procedure for the same condition. The agent must recognize clinically
appropriate substitutes without explicit guidance from the user.

Compound criteria with fallback

The user constructs queries integrating multiple clinical eventsвҖ”diagnoses, lab results, and vital
signsвҖ”combined via logical operators (AND/OR) to identify a specific patient cohort. When partial criteria are not met, the query requires selective fallback on specific conditions while maintaining
others, testing the agentвҖҷs ability to manage complex inclusion and exclusion logic.

Schema fallback handling

The userвҖҷs query targets a specific database table that does not exist in the schema (e.g., a dedicated
cancer registry table). The agent must recognize the tableвҖҷs absence and fall back to an alternative data
source (e.g., the general diagnosis table) to fulfill the userвҖҷs intent.

28

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

B.3

SQL A NNOTATION S TYLE

SQL annotations in EHR-ChatQA use Common Table Expressions (CTEs) to enhance readability
and maintainability. A sample user instruction and its corresponding gold SQL query are shown in
Table 11.
Table 11: Sample user instruction and its GT SQL query.
User Instruction

Gold SQL
WITH LastAdmission AS (
SELECT admissionid
FROM hospitaladmissions
WHERE patientid = 10018845
ORDER BY admitdatetime DESC
LIMIT 1
),
HbTest AS (
SELECT itemcode
FROM labtesttypes
WHERE itemname = вҖҷhemoglobinвҖҷ
)
SELECT lr.resultdatetime
FROM labresults lr
JOIN LastAdmission la
ON lr.admissionid = la.admissionid
JOIN HbTest ht
ON lr.itemcode = ht.itemcode
WHERE lr.patientid = 10018845
AND lr.resultvalue <= 8
AND lr.resultvalue IS NOT NULL
ORDER BY lr.resultdatetime;

Your goal is to find information related to a specific
patientвҖҷs lab tests. Specifically, you are interested in
patient ID 10018845 and want to know all timestamps
when the Hb value was 8 or lower during the patientвҖҷs
last hospital visit. You want to search for Hb specifically, not other similar lab tests like вҖңHb CвҖқ or вҖңHb
A2.вҖқ When querying the DB agent, since you do not
know how Hb is stored, use common terms like вҖңHbвҖқ
or вҖңHgbвҖқ when referring to it, and let the DB agent find
it for you.

29

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

B.4

EHR DATABASE P REPROCESSING

Our preliminary analysis revealed that many LLMs memorize the original MIMIC-IV and eICU
schemas, which leads to SQL generation without actual schema exploration. To prevent this, we
rename the schema so that generating SQL without using the provided schema tools inevitably
results in errors. The detailed schema mappings are provided in Table 12 and Table 13.
B.4.1

MIMIC-IV R ENAMING
Table 12: Table and column renaming mappings for MIMIC-IV.

Original Table

Mapped Table

Column Mappings (MIMIC-IV to MIMIC-IVвӢҶ)

patients

demographics

row id вҶ’ recordid, subject id вҶ’ patientid, gender вҶ’ gender, dob вҶ’ dateofbirth, dod вҶ’ dateofdeath

admissions

hospitaladmissions

row id вҶ’ recordid, subject id вҶ’ patientid, hadm id вҶ’ admissionid, admittime вҶ’ admitdatetime, dischtime вҶ’ dischargedatetime, admission type вҶ’
admissiontype, admission location вҶ’ admitsource, discharge location вҶ’ dischargedestination, insurance вҶ’ insurancetype, language вҶ’ language, marital status вҶ’ maritalstatus, age вҶ’ age

d icd diagnoses

diagnosiscodes

row id вҶ’ recordid, icd code вҶ’ icdcode, icd version вҶ’ codeversion, long title
вҶ’ description

d icd procedures

procedurecodes

row id вҶ’ recordid, icd code вҶ’ icdcode, icd version вҶ’ codeversion, long title
вҶ’ description

d labitems

labtesttypes

row id вҶ’ recordid, itemid вҶ’ itemcode, label вҶ’ itemname

d items

clinicalitemtypes

row id вҶ’ recordid, itemid вҶ’ itemcode, label вҶ’ itemname, abbreviation вҶ’
abbreviation, linksto вҶ’ itemtype

diagnoses icd

admissiondiagnoses

row id вҶ’ recordid, subject id вҶ’ patientid, hadm id вҶ’ admissionid, icd code
вҶ’ icdcode, icd version вҶ’ codeversion, charttime вҶ’ recordeddatetime

procedures icd

admissionprocedures

row id вҶ’ recordid, subject id вҶ’ patientid, hadm id вҶ’ admissionid, icd code
вҶ’ icdcode, icd version вҶ’ codeversion, charttime вҶ’ recordeddatetime

labevents

labresults

row id вҶ’ recordid, subject id вҶ’ patientid, hadm id вҶ’ admissionid, itemid вҶ’
itemcode, charttime вҶ’ resultdatetime, valuenum вҶ’ resultvalue, valueuom вҶ’
resultunit

prescriptions

medicationorders

row id вҶ’ recordid, subject id вҶ’ patientid, hadm id вҶ’ admissionid, starttime вҶ’ startdatetime, stoptime вҶ’ enddatetime, drug вҶ’ medicationname,
dose val rx вҶ’ dosevalue, dose unit rx вҶ’ doseunit, route вҶ’ administrationroute

cost

costrecords

row id вҶ’ recordid, subject id вҶ’ patientid, hadm id вҶ’ admissionid, event type
вҶ’ eventtype, event id вҶ’ costid, chargetime вҶ’ costdatetime, cost вҶ’ costamount

chartevents

clinicalevents

row id вҶ’ recordid, subject id вҶ’ patientid, hadm id вҶ’ admissionid, stay id вҶ’
icuadmissionid, itemid вҶ’ itemcode, charttime вҶ’ recordeddatetime, valuenum
вҶ’ value, valueuom вҶ’ unit

inputevents

intakerecords

row id вҶ’ recordid, subject id вҶ’ patientid, hadm id вҶ’ admissionid, stay id вҶ’
icuadmissionid, starttime вҶ’ startdatetime, itemid вҶ’ itemcode, totalamount вҶ’
totalvolume, totalamountuom вҶ’ volumeunit

outputevents

outputrecords

row id вҶ’ recordid, subject id вҶ’ patientid, hadm id вҶ’ admissionid, stay id вҶ’
icuadmissionid, charttime вҶ’ recordeddatetime, itemid вҶ’ itemcode, value вҶ’
volume, valueuom вҶ’ volumeunit

microbiologyevents

microbiologyresults

row id вҶ’ recordid, subject id вҶ’ patientid, hadm id вҶ’ admissionid, charttime
вҶ’ collecteddatetime, spec type desc вҶ’ specimentype, test name вҶ’ testname,
org name вҶ’ organismname

icustays

icuepisodes

row id вҶ’ recordid, subject id вҶ’ patientid, hadm id вҶ’ admissionid, stay id вҶ’
icuadmissionid, first careunit вҶ’ initialcareunit, last careunit вҶ’ finalcareunit,
intime вҶ’ admitdatetime, outtime вҶ’ dischargedatetime

transfers

patienttransfers

row id вҶ’ recordid, subject id вҶ’ patientid, hadm id вҶ’ admissionid, transfer id
вҶ’ transferid, eventtype вҶ’ transfertype, careunit вҶ’ careunit, intime вҶ’ transferindatetime, outtime вҶ’ transferoutdatetime

30

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

B.4.2

E ICU R ENAMING

Table 13: Table and column renaming mappings for eICU.
Original Table

Mapped Table

Column Mappings (eICU to eICUвӢҶ)

patient

icupatient

uniquepid вҶ’ patient id, patienthealthsystemstayid вҶ’ hosp id, patientunitstayid вҶ’ unit id, gender вҶ’ gender, age вҶ’ age, ethnicity вҶ’ ethnicity, hospitalid вҶ’ hospital id, wardid вҶ’ ward id, admissionheight вҶ’ height admission,
admissionweight вҶ’ weight admission, dischargeweight вҶ’ weight discharge,
hospitaladmittime вҶ’ hospital admit time, hospitaladmitsource вҶ’ hospital admission source, unitadmittime вҶ’ unit admit time, unitdischargetime вҶ’
unit discharge time, hospitaldischargetime вҶ’ hospital discharge time, hospitaldischargestatus вҶ’ hospital discharge status

diagnosis

condition

diagnosisid вҶ’ condition id, patientunitstayid вҶ’ unit id, diagnosisname вҶ’
condition name, diagnosistime вҶ’ condition time, icd9code вҶ’ icd9 code

treatment

treatment

treatmentid вҶ’ treatment id, patientunitstayid вҶ’ unit id, treatmentname вҶ’
treatment name, treatmenttime вҶ’ treatment time

lab

lab

labid вҶ’ lab id, patientunitstayid вҶ’ unit id, labname вҶ’ lab name, labresult вҶ’
lab result, labresulttime вҶ’ lab result time

medication

prescription

medicationid вҶ’ prescription id, patientunitstayid вҶ’ unit id, drugname вҶ’
drug name, dosage вҶ’ dosage, routeadmin вҶ’ administration route, drugstarttime вҶ’ medication start time, drugstoptime вҶ’ medication stop time

cost

cost

costid вҶ’ cost id, patienthealthsystemstayid вҶ’ hosp id, patientunitstayid вҶ’
unit id, eventtype вҶ’ event type, eventid вҶ’ event id, chargetime вҶ’ cost time,
cost вҶ’ cost amount

allergy

allergy reaction

allergyid вҶ’ allergy id, patientunitstayid вҶ’ unit id, drugname вҶ’ drug name,
allergyname вҶ’ allergy name, allergytime вҶ’ allergy time

intakeoutput

fluid balance

intakeoutputid вҶ’ fluid balance id, patientunitstayid вҶ’ unit id, cellpath вҶ’
fluid path, celllabel вҶ’ fluid label, cellvaluenumeric вҶ’ fluid value numeric, intakeoutputtime вҶ’ fluid balance time

microlab

microbiology

microlabid вҶ’ microbiology id, patientunitstayid вҶ’ unit id, culturesite вҶ’ culture site, organism вҶ’ organism, culturetakentime вҶ’ culture taken time

vitalperiodic

vital signs

vitalperiodicid вҶ’ vital sign id, patientunitstayid вҶ’ unit id, temperature вҶ’
temperature, sao2 вҶ’ sao2, heartrate вҶ’ heart rate, respiration вҶ’ respiration rate, systemicsystolic вҶ’ systolic bp, systemicdiastolic вҶ’ diastolic bp,
systemicmean вҶ’ mean bp, observationtime вҶ’ vital time

hospital

hospital

hospitalid вҶ’ hospital id, numbedscategory вҶ’ bed capacity category, teachingstatus вҶ’ teaching status, region вҶ’ region

31

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

C

AGENT I MPLEMENTATION

For selecting the backbone LLMs for the agents, small models (e.g., 7B or 13B), DeepSeek-R1,
and the Gemma 3 series are excluded due to their limited performance in tool invocation tasks.
Owing to budget constraints, we also exclude Anthropic models (e.g., Opus 4 and Sonnet) as well
as Gemini-2.5-Pro.
Table 14 presents the system prompt used for our agent baselines. In addition to the system prompt,
the agentвҖҷs input includes three other components: (1) agent behavioral rules detailing interaction
behavior (Section C.2); (2) evaluation rules for IncreQA and AdaptQA to ensure accurate evaluation
(Section A.6); and (3) database-specific rules outlining the SQL annotation assumptions for MIMICIVвӢҶ and eICUвӢҶ (Section A.5).
C.1

AGENT S YSTEM P ROMPT
Table 14: Agent system prompt.

Instruction:
- You are a DB agent that helps users by answering their questions
in natural language based on information from a database.
- You are currently engaged in a conversation with a user who wants
to retrieve some data or statistics from an EHR database.
- If the userвҖҷs request is ambiguous or missing details (e.g.,
filtering criteria), ask clarifying questions to better understand
the request.
- You have access to a set of tools to assist the user:
- table_search: search for tables in the database
- column_search: search for columns within a table
- value_substring_search: search for values in a column by
substring match
- value_similarity_search: search for values in a column by
semantic similarity (embedding-based)
- sql_execute: run SQL queries on the database
- web_search: retrieve external clinical knowledge not in the
database
- Use table_search and column_search to explore the database schema.
- Use value_substring_search and value_similarity_search to explore
stored values.
- Clinical concepts (e.g., diagnoses, procedures, medications, lab
tests) in the database may not exactly match the userвҖҷs words. Use
the value search tools to find relevant entries.
- To search for or verify clinical knowledge not in the database (e.
g., a drugвҖҷs mechanism of action), use web_search.
- Never invent or assume information that is not provided by the
user or retrieved using the tools.
- Make only one tool call at a time. Do not send a user-facing
response in the same turn as a tool call.
- After gathering all necessary information, use sql_execute to
write and run a single valid SQL query that fully answers the userвҖҷs
latest request.
- When you write an SQL query, always execute it with sql_execute
and return the results to the user along with your explanation.
{agent_rule}
{database_rule}

C.2

AGENT RULES
Table 15: Agent rules.

Below are the general rules for the DB agent:

32

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

- The DB agent must assume the user has no knowledge of SQL,
databases, or stored values, and cannot execute queries.
- The DB agent must interact with the user only in natural language
and must not show raw SQL queries.
- The DB agent must not modify the database schema or contents. The
following commands are forbidden: INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE, DROP,
ALTER.
- The DB agent must write queries that finish within 60 seconds;
otherwise, the query results will be invalid.
- The DB agent must limit each conversation to 30 interactions (
including user exchanges and tool calls) and 600 seconds total.
- The DB agent must always explain answers in natural language,
including the reasoning or conditions used to arrive at those
answers. If SQL references are necessary, the DB agent must explain
them in terms understandable to someone with no SQL knowledge.
- The DB agent must clearly explain when a question cannot be
answered (e.g., due to limitations of SQL or empty results) and ask
the user to rephrase or modify the request.
- The DB agent must generate a non-empty response, which must
include either a message or a tool call.

C.3

AGENT RULES FOR E VALUATION

Table 16 and Table 17 present the prompts used for IncreQA and AdaptQA tasks, respectively. These
prompts are appended to the agent rules to guide the agent toward behavior that aligns with accurate
evaluation criteria. Note that for both task types, the agentвҖҷs responses are evaluated each time they
are generated, as correct answers may emerge during the conversation due to the iterative nature of
open QA dialogues.
Table 16: Scoring rules for IncreQA.
Below are the grading rules:
- The DB agentвҖҷs performance is evaluated based on the generated SQL
queries, requiring at least one SQL query (via sql_execute) to
retrieve answers during the interaction with the database.
- For accurate assessment, when the user revises their question, the
DB agent must write a new SQL query from scratch to fully address
the latest request, without relying on previous query results.
- For questions that involve calculations (such as time differences
or survival rates) or data manipulation/aggregation, the DB agent
must use SQL language to compute the results rather than relying on
its LLM capabilities.

Table 17: Scoring rules for AdaptQA.
Below are the grading rules:
- The DB agentвҖҷs performance is evaluated based on the results in
its natural language response to the user.
- When providing answers to the user, the DB agent must enclose the
final answer in <answer></answer> tags (e.g., <answer>42</answer>).
All other content, including intermediate results, explanations,
units, and any additional details, must be placed outside these tags
.
- When answers are textual data (e.g., timestamps or diagnosis names
), use them exactly as stored in the database. For numerical answers
, round them to four decimal places.

33

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

D

S AMPLE T RAJECTORIES

In this section, we present sample task instances along with one successful and one failed conversation trajectory for IncreQA and AdaptQA.
D.1

I NCREMENTAL Q UERY R EFINEMENT

D.1.1

S UCCESSFUL C ASE (I NCRE QA)

The agent successfully retrieves the number of patients diagnosed with breast cancer by querying
values in the description column of the diagnosiscodes table.
Instruction: Your goal is to find the number of patients admitted to the hospital who meet
specific criteria. Specifically, you want to know how many patients admitted in the past 90
days have a family history of breast cancer.
===
User: IвҖҷm trying to figure out how many patients admitted to the hospital have certain
conditions.
Agent: table search(arguments={вҖқtool inputвҖқ:вҖқвҖқ})
Tool: admissiondiagnoses, admissionprocedures, clinicalevents, clinicalitemtypes,
costrecords, demographics, diagnosiscodes, hospitaladmissions, icuepisodes,
intakerecords, labresults, labtesttypes, medicationorders, microbiologyresults,
outputrecords, patienttransfers, procedurecodes
Agent: column search(arguments={вҖқtable namesвҖқ:вҖқadmissiondiagnoses,diagnosiscodesвҖқ})
Tool: CREATE TABLE admissiondiagnoses (
recordid INTEGER NOT NULL,
patientid INTEGER NOT NULL,
admissionid INTEGER NOT NULL,
icdcode TEXT NOT NULL,
codeversion INTEGER NOT NULL,
recordeddatetime TEXT NOT NULL,
PRIMARY KEY (recordid),
FOREIGN KEY (codeversion) REFERENCES diagnosiscodes (codeversion),
FOREIGN KEY (icdcode) REFERENCES diagnosiscodes (icdcode),
FOREIGN KEY (admissionid) REFERENCES hospitaladmissions (admissionid)
)
/*
3 rows from admissiondiagnoses table:
recordid patientid admissionid icdcode codeversion recordeddatetime
0 10035185 22580999 4139 9 2100вҲ’05вҲ’17 12:53:00

34

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

1 10035185 22580999 v707 9 2100вҲ’05вҲ’17 12:53:00
2 10035185 22580999 41401 9 2100вҲ’05вҲ’17 12:53:00
*/
CREATE TABLE diagnosiscodes (
recordid INTEGER NOT NULL,
icdcode TEXT NOT NULL,
codeversion INTEGER NOT NULL,
description TEXT NOT NULL,
PRIMARY KEY (recordid)
)
/*
3 rows from diagnosiscodes table:
recordid icdcode codeversion description
0 0090 9 infectious colitis, enteritis, and gastroenteritis
1 01160 9 tuberculous pneumonia [any form], unspecified
2 01186 9 other specified pulmonary tuberculosis, tubercle bacilli not found by
bacteriological or histological examination, but tuberculosis confirmed by other methods [
inoculation of animals]
*/
Agent: Could you clarify which specific conditions youвҖҷd like to count? For example, are you
interested in diabetes, heart failure, COPD, etc.? Also, should these diagnoses be those
recorded at the time of hospital admission?
User: I want to know how many patients admitted in the last 90 days have a family history
of breast cancer.
Agent: value substring search(arguments={вҖқtableвҖқ:вҖқdiagnosiscodesвҖқ,вҖқcolumnвҖқ:вҖқdescription
вҖқ,вҖқvalueвҖқ:вҖқfamilyвҖқ})
Tool: Values in diagnosiscodes.description containing вҖҷfamilyвҖҷ: [вҖҷfamily history of polycystic
kidneyвҖҷ, вҖҷnonвҲ’family member, perpetrator of maltreatment and neglectвҖҷ, вҖҷfamily history of
unspecified malignant neoplasmвҖҷ, ..., вҖҷfamily history of eye disordersвҖҷ, вҖҷfamily disruption due
to death of family memberвҖҷ].
Agent: column search(arguments={вҖқtable namesвҖқ:вҖқhospitaladmissionsвҖқ})
Tool: CREATE TABLE hospitaladmissions (
recordid INTEGER NOT NULL,
patientid INTEGER NOT NULL,
admissionid INTEGER NOT NULL,

35

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

admitdatetime TEXT NOT NULL,
dischargedatetime TEXT,
admissiontype TEXT NOT NULL,
admitsource TEXT NOT NULL,
dischargedestination TEXT,
insurancetype TEXT NOT NULL,
language TEXT,
maritalstatus TEXT,
age INTEGER NOT NULL,
PRIMARY KEY (recordid),
FOREIGN KEY (patientid) REFERENCES demographics (patientid)
)
/*
3 rows from hospitaladmissions table:
recordid patientid admissionid admitdatetime dischargedatetime admissiontype
admitsource dischargedestination insurancetype language maritalstatus age
0 10004235 24181354 2100вҲ’03вҲ’19 14:38:00 2100вҲ’03вҲ’28 14:02:00 urgent transfer from hospital
skilled nursing facility medicaid english single 47
1 10009628 25926192 2100вҲ’09вҲ’30 17:08:00 2100вҲ’10вҲ’08 13:20:00 urgent transfer from
hospital home health care medicaid ? married 58
2 10006053 22942076 2100вҲ’11вҲ’15 23:39:00 2100вҲ’11вҲ’17 17:20:00 urgent transfer from hospital
died medicaid english None 52
*/
Agent: value substring search(arguments={вҖқtableвҖқ:вҖқdiagnosiscodesвҖқ,вҖқcolumnвҖқ:вҖқdescription
вҖқ,вҖқvalueвҖқ:вҖқbreastвҖқ})
Tool: Values in diagnosiscodes.description containing вҖҷbreastвҖҷ: [вҖҷother and unspecified
disorder of breast associated with childbirth, postpartum condition or complicationвҖҷ, вҖҷ
malignant neoplasm of axillary tail of female breastвҖҷ, вҖҷfullвҲ’thickness skin loss [third degree,
not otherwise specified] of chest wall, excluding breast and nippleвҖҷ, ...вҖҷ, вҖҷpersonal history of
malignant neoplasm of breastвҖҷ, вҖҷopen wound of breast, without mention of complicationвҖҷ].
Agent: sql execute(arguments={вҖқqueryвҖқ: вҖқSELECT COUNT(DISTINCT ha.patientid) AS
num patients FROM hospitaladmissions AS ha JOIN admissiondiagnoses AS ad ON ha.
admissionid = ad.admissionid JOIN diagnosiscodes AS dc ON ad.icdcode = dc.icdcode AND
ad.codeversion = dc.codeversion WHERE dc.description = вҖҷfamily history of malignant
neoplasm of breastвҖҷ AND ha.admitdatetime >= datetime(вҖҷ2100вҲ’12вҲ’31 23:59:00вҖҷ, вҖҷвҲ’90 daysвҖҷ)
;вҖқ})
Tool: [(1,)]

36

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

Agent: There have been 1 unique patient admitted in the last 90 days with a diagnosis of
family history of malignant neoplasm of breast.
User: Can you double check that the answer covers my goals?
Agent: YesвҲ’hereвҖҷs how the query addresses each part of your goal:
вҲ’ Last 90 days: We filtered admissions with
ha.admitdatetime >= datetime(вҖҷ2100вҲ’12вҲ’31 23:59:00вҖҷ,вҖҷвҲ’90 daysвҖҷ)
вҲ’ Family history of breast cancer: We joined admissions вҲ’> diagnoses вҲ’> codes and used
dc.description = вҖҷfamily history of malignant neoplasm of breastвҖҷ
вҲ’ Unique patients: We counted DISTINCT ha.patientid so repeat admissions arenвҖҷt doubleвҲ’
counted.
The result was 1 patient. Let me know if youвҖҷd like any further breakdown or checks!
User: ###END###

37

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

D.1.2

FAILED C ASE (I NCRE QA)

The agent fails to retrieve information on breast cancer, as it queries unrelated tables and columns
(e.g., clinicalevents and clinicalitemtypes) instead of the diagnosiscodes table. Due to the use of
FAISS, wrapped in the LangChain library, values with semantic similarity below the default threshold (0.8) are not retrieved. In the example below, the agent applies the value similarity tool to the
itemname column of the clinicalitemtypes table for вҖңcancer,вҖқ but the tool returns no result. Note that
itemname corresponds to the label in the d item table in MIMIC-IV, which covers a wide range of
clinical practices, vital signs, and measurements.
Instruction: Your goal is to find the number of patients admitted to the hospital who meet
specific criteria. Specifically, you want to know how many patients admitted in the past 90
days have a family history of breast cancer.
===
User: I want to find out how many patients have been admitted to the hospital recently and
also have a family history of breast cancer.
Agent: To assist you with your request, I need to clarify a couple of things:
1. What do you mean by вҖқrecentlyвҖқ? Are you looking for admissions within a specific time
frame (e.g., the last month, last year)?
2. How is the family history of breast cancer recorded in the database? Is there a specific
table or column that indicates this information?
Once I have this information, I can proceed to gather the necessary data from the database
.
User: IвҖҷm interested in patients admitted in the last 90 days. As for the family history, could
you check the database to find where that info is stored?
Agent: table search(arguments={вҖқtool inputвҖқ:вҖқвҖқ})
Tool: admissiondiagnoses, admissionprocedures, clinicalevents, clinicalitemtypes,
costrecords, demographics, diagnosiscodes, hospitaladmissions, icuepisodes,
intakerecords, labresults, labtesttypes, medicationorders, microbiologyresults,
outputrecords, patienttransfers, procedurecodes
Agent: column search(arguments={вҖқtable namesвҖқ:вҖқdemographicsвҖқ})
Tool: CREATE TABLE demographics (
recordid INTEGER NOT NULL,
patientid INTEGER NOT NULL,
gender TEXT NOT NULL,
dateofbirth TEXT NOT NULL,
dateofdeath TEXT,

38

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

PRIMARY KEY (recordid)
)
/*
3 rows from demographics table:
recordid patientid gender dateofbirth dateofdeath
0 10014729 f 2079вҲ’07вҲ’22 00:00:00 None
1 10003400 f 2028вҲ’07вҲ’25 00:00:00 None
2 10002428 f 2020вҲ’07вҲ’30 00:00:00 None
*/
Agent: column search(arguments={вҖқtable namesвҖқ:вҖқclinicaleventsвҖқ})
Tool: CREATE TABLE clinicalevents (
recordid INTEGER NOT NULL,
patientid INTEGER NOT NULL,
admissionid INTEGER NOT NULL,
icuadmissionid INTEGER NOT NULL,
itemcode INTEGER NOT NULL,
recordeddatetime TEXT NOT NULL,
value DOUBLE PRECISION,
unit TEXT,
PRIMARY KEY (recordid),
FOREIGN KEY (itemcode) REFERENCES clinicalitemtypes (itemcode),
FOREIGN KEY (icuadmissionid) REFERENCES icuepisodes (icuadmissionid),
FOREIGN KEY (admissionid) REFERENCES hospitaladmissions (admissionid)
)
/*
3 rows from clinicalevents table:
recordid patientid admissionid icuadmissionid itemcode recordeddatetime value unit
0 10005817 20626031 32604416 220210 2100вҲ’12вҲ’24 00:00:00 19.0 insp/min
1 10005817 20626031 32604416 220051 2100вҲ’12вҲ’24 00:00:00 37.0 mmhg
2 10005817 20626031 32604416 223762 2100вҲ’12вҲ’24 00:00:00 37.0 c
*/
Agent: column search(arguments={вҖқtable namesвҖқ:вҖқclinicalitemtypesвҖқ})
Tool: CREATE TABLE clinicalitemtypes (
recordid INTEGER NOT NULL,
itemcode INTEGER NOT NULL,
itemname TEXT NOT NULL,
abbreviation TEXT NOT NULL,
itemtype TEXT NOT NULL,

39

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

PRIMARY KEY (recordid)
)
/*
3 rows from clinicalitemtypes table:
recordid itemcode itemname abbreviation itemtype
0 226228 gender gender clinicalevents
1 226545 race race clinicalevents
2 229877 suction events (ch) suction events (ch) clinicalevents
*/
Agent: value substring search(arguments={вҖқtableвҖқ:вҖқclinicalitemtypesвҖқ,вҖқcolumnвҖқ:вҖқitemname
вҖқ,вҖқvalueвҖқ:вҖқfamily historyвҖқ})
Tool: No values in clinicalitemtypes.itemname contain вҖҷfamily historyвҖҷ.
Agent: value similarity search(arguments={вҖқtableвҖқ:вҖқclinicalitemtypesвҖқ,вҖқcolumnвҖқ:вҖқitemname
вҖқ,вҖқvalueвҖқ:вҖқfamily historyвҖқ})
Tool: No matches found in clinicalitemtypes.itemname for вҖҷfamily historyвҖҷ.
Agent: column search(arguments={вҖқtable namesвҖқ:вҖқhospitaladmissionsвҖқ})
Tool: CREATE TABLE hospitaladmissions (
recordid INTEGER NOT NULL,
patientid INTEGER NOT NULL,
admissionid INTEGER NOT NULL,
admitdatetime TEXT NOT NULL,
dischargedatetime TEXT,
admissiontype TEXT NOT NULL,
admitsource TEXT NOT NULL,
dischargedestination TEXT,
insurancetype TEXT NOT NULL,
language TEXT,
maritalstatus TEXT,
age INTEGER NOT NULL,
PRIMARY KEY (recordid),
FOREIGN KEY (patientid) REFERENCES demographics (patientid)
)
/*
3 rows from hospitaladmissions table:
recordid patientid admissionid admitdatetime dischargedatetime admissiontype
admitsource dischargedestination insurancetype language maritalstatus age

40

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

0 10004235 24181354 2100вҲ’03вҲ’19 14:38:00 2100вҲ’03вҲ’28 14:02:00 urgent transfer from hospital
skilled nursing facility medicaid english single 47
1 10009628 25926192 2100вҲ’09вҲ’30 17:08:00 2100вҲ’10вҲ’08 13:20:00 urgent transfer from
hospital home health care medicaid ? married 58
2 10006053 22942076 2100вҲ’11вҲ’15 23:39:00 2100вҲ’11вҲ’17 17:20:00 urgent transfer from hospital
died medicaid english None 52
*/
Agent: column search(arguments={вҖқtable namesвҖқ:вҖқdemographicsвҖқ})
Tool: CREATE TABLE demographics (
recordid INTEGER NOT NULL,
patientid INTEGER NOT NULL,
gender TEXT NOT NULL,
dateofbirth TEXT NOT NULL,
dateofdeath TEXT,
PRIMARY KEY (recordid)
)
/*
3 rows from demographics table:
recordid patientid gender dateofbirth dateofdeath
0 10014729 f 2079вҲ’07вҲ’22 00:00:00 None
1 10003400 f 2028вҲ’07вҲ’25 00:00:00 None
2 10002428 f 2020вҲ’07вҲ’30 00:00:00 None
*/
Agent: column search(arguments={вҖқtable namesвҖқ:вҖқclinicaleventsвҖқ})

Tool: CREATE TABLE clinicalevents (
recordid INTEGER NOT NULL,
patientid INTEGER NOT NULL,
admissionid INTEGER NOT NULL,
icuadmissionid INTEGER NOT NULL,
itemcode INTEGER NOT NULL,
recordeddatetime TEXT NOT NULL,
value DOUBLE PRECISION,
unit TEXT,
PRIMARY KEY (recordid),
FOREIGN KEY (itemcode) REFERENCES clinicalitemtypes (itemcode),
FOREIGN KEY (icuadmissionid) REFERENCES icuepisodes (icuadmissionid),
FOREIGN KEY (admissionid) REFERENCES hospitaladmissions (admissionid)

41

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

)
/*
3 rows from clinicalevents table:
recordid patientid admissionid icuadmissionid itemcode recordeddatetime value unit
0 10005817 20626031 32604416 220210 2100вҲ’12вҲ’24 00:00:00 19.0 insp/min
1 10005817 20626031 32604416 220051 2100вҲ’12вҲ’24 00:00:00 37.0 mmhg
2 10005817 20626031 32604416 223762 2100вҲ’12вҲ’24 00:00:00 37.0 c
*/
Agent: value substring search(arguments={вҖқtableвҖқ:вҖқclinicalitemtypesвҖқ,вҖқcolumnвҖқ:вҖқitemname
вҖқ,вҖқvalueвҖқ:вҖқcancerвҖқ})
Tool: No values in clinicalitemtypes.itemname contain вҖҷcancerвҖҷ.
Agent: value similarity search(arguments={вҖқtableвҖқ:вҖқclinicalitemtypesвҖқ,вҖқcolumnвҖқ:вҖқitemname
вҖқ,вҖқvalueвҖқ:вҖқcancerвҖқ})
Tool: No matches found in clinicalitemtypes.itemname for вҖҷcancerвҖҷ.
Agent: It seems that I couldnвҖҷt find any specific entries related to вҖқfamily history of breast
cancerвҖқ in the database. This could mean that the information is either stored in a different
format or not recorded in the tables I checked.
To proceed, I can look for any general family history or cancerвҲ’related entries in the
clinical events or demographics tables. Would you like me to do that?
User: Yes, please check for any general family history or cancerвҲ’related info.
Agent: value substring search(arguments={вҖқtableвҖқ: вҖқclinicalitemtypesвҖқ, вҖқcolumnвҖқ: вҖқ
itemnameвҖқ, вҖқvalueвҖқ: вҖқfamily historyвҖқ})
Tool: No values in clinicalitemtypes.itemname contain вҖҷfamily historyвҖҷ.
Agent: value substring search(arguments={вҖқtableвҖқ:вҖқclinicalitemtypesвҖқ,вҖқcolumnвҖқ:вҖқitemname
вҖқ,вҖқvalueвҖқ:вҖқcancerвҖқ})
Tool: No values in clinicalitemtypes.itemname contain вҖҷcancerвҖҷ.
Agent: I have searched for general family history and cancerвҲ’related information in the
database, but unfortunately, I couldnвҖҷt find any relevant entries in the clinical item types. It
appears that the information regarding family history of breast cancer may not be
explicitly recorded in the database, or it might be stored in a different format or table that I

42

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

havenвҖҷt checked. If you have any other specific criteria or different information you would
like to explore, please let me know!
User: Okay, can you at least tell me how many patients have been admitted in the last 90
days?
Agent: sql execute(arguments={вҖқqueryвҖқ: вҖқSELECT COUNT(DISTINCT patientid) AS
patient count FROM hospitaladmissions WHERE admitdatetime >= вҖҷ2100вҲ’09вҲ’30вҖҷвҖқ})
Tool: [(38,)]
Agent: There have been 38 patients admitted to the hospital in the last 90 days. If you have
any other questions or need further assistance, feel free to ask!
User: Okay, so you couldnвҖҷt find the family history info. Just to confirm, you were able to
find the number of patients admitted in the last 90 days?
Agent: Yes, thatвҖҷs correct! I was able to find that there have been 38 patients admitted to
the hospital in the last 90 days. However, I couldnвҖҷt find any specific information regarding
family history of breast cancer in the database. If you have any other questions or need
further assistance, please let me know!
User: Double check that youвҖҷve covered my goals: the number of patients admitted in the
last 90 days with a family history of breast cancer.
Agent: I understand your request clearly now. You want to know the number of patients
who were admitted in the last 90 days and also have a family history of breast cancer.
Unfortunately, I was unable to find any specific entries related to family history of breast
cancer in the database. This means I cannot confirm how many patients meet both criteria.
If you have any other specific information or different criteria you would like to explore,
please let me know!
User: ###END###

43

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

D.2
D.2.1

A DAPTIVE Q UERY R EFINEMENT
S UCCESSFUL C ASE (A DAPT QA)

The user initially asks whether a specific patient was prescribed carbamazepine for epilepsy treatment, but the agent finds that no such records exist for the patient. The user then requests information
about other medications for epilepsy. The agent searches the database using clinical knowledge with
keywords such as levetiracetam, phenytoin, and phenobarbital. The agent checks whether the patient
was prescribed any of these medications and successfully retrieves the most recent prescription date
for levetiracetam, as requested.
Instruction: Your goal is to explore patient data related to medication prescriptions.
Specifically, you are interested in patient ID 10008287 and want to know when they were
prescribed carbamazepine for epilepsy treatment. If the patient was prescribed
carbamazepine, you want to know the most recent prescription time after the first epilepsy
diagnosis. If the patient was not prescribed carbamazepine, you want to identify whether
any other class of medication used for epilepsy treatment was prescribed. If such
medications are found, you want to know the most recent prescription time after the first
epilepsy diagnosis. If no such medications are found, end the conversation. You want the
answer in the exact time format recorded in the database.
===
User: IвҖҷm looking into patient prescriptions. Can you help me find some info about the
medications prescribed to patient ID 10008287?
Agent: table search(arguments={вҖқtool inputвҖқ:вҖқвҖқ})
Tool: admissiondiagnoses, admissionprocedures, clinicalevents, clinicalitemtypes,
costrecords, demographics, diagnosiscodes, hospitaladmissions, icuepisodes,
intakerecords, labresults, labtesttypes, medicationorders, microbiologyresults,
outputrecords, patienttransfers, procedurecodes
Agent: column search(arguments={вҖқtable namesвҖқ:вҖқmedicationordersвҖқ})
Tool: CREATE TABLE medicationorders (
recordid INTEGER NOT NULL,
patientid INTEGER NOT NULL,
admissionid INTEGER NOT NULL,
startdatetime TEXT NOT NULL,
enddatetime TEXT,
medicationname TEXT NOT NULL,
dosevalue TEXT NOT NULL,
doseunit TEXT NOT NULL,
administrationroute TEXT NOT NULL,
PRIMARY KEY (recordid),

44

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

FOREIGN KEY (admissionid) REFERENCES hospitaladmissions (admissionid)
)
/*
3 rows from medicationorders table:
recordid patientid admissionid startdatetime enddatetime medicationname dosevalue
doseunit administrationroute
0 10020740 23831430 2100вҲ’04вҲ’19 11:00:00 2100вҲ’04вҲ’20 22:00:00 insulin 0.0 unit sc
1 10005817 20626031 2100вҲ’12вҲ’20 02:00:00 2100вҲ’12вҲ’21 12:00:00 insulin 0.0 unit sc
2 10005817 20626031 2100вҲ’12вҲ’27 10:00:00 2100вҲ’12вҲ’28 19:00:00 insulin 0.0 unit sc
*/
Agent: Could you clarify which details youвҖҷd like to see for patient 10008287вҖҷs prescriptions
? For example, are you interested in the medication names only, the start/end dates,
dosages, administration routes, or all of those?
User: IвҖҷm particularly interested in whether patient 10008287 was prescribed
carbamazepine for epilepsy. If so, I want to know the most recent time it was prescribed,
but only after their first epilepsy diagnosis.
Agent: value substring search(arguments={вҖқtableвҖқ:вҖқmedicationordersвҖқ,вҖқcolumnвҖқ:вҖқ
medicationnameвҖқ,вҖқvalueвҖқ:вҖқcarbamazepineвҖқ,вҖқkвҖқ:10})
Tool: Values in medicationorders.medicationname containing вҖҷcarbamazepineвҖҷ: [вҖҷ
carbamazepineвҖҷ].
Agent: column search(arguments={вҖқtable namesвҖқ:вҖқadmissiondiagnosesвҖқ})
Tool: CREATE TABLE admissiondiagnoses (
recordid INTEGER NOT NULL,
patientid INTEGER NOT NULL,
admissionid INTEGER NOT NULL,
icdcode TEXT NOT NULL,
codeversion INTEGER NOT NULL,
recordeddatetime TEXT NOT NULL,
PRIMARY KEY (recordid),
FOREIGN KEY (codeversion) REFERENCES diagnosiscodes (codeversion),
FOREIGN KEY (icdcode) REFERENCES diagnosiscodes (icdcode),
FOREIGN KEY (admissionid) REFERENCES hospitaladmissions (admissionid)
)
/*
3 rows from admissiondiagnoses table:
recordid patientid admissionid icdcode codeversion recordeddatetime

45

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

0 10035185 22580999 4139 9 2100вҲ’05вҲ’17 12:53:00
1 10035185 22580999 v707 9 2100вҲ’05вҲ’17 12:53:00
2 10035185 22580999 41401 9 2100вҲ’05вҲ’17 12:53:00
*/
Agent: column search(arguments={вҖқtable namesвҖқ:вҖқdiagnosiscodesвҖқ})
Tool: CREATE TABLE diagnosiscodes (
recordid INTEGER NOT NULL,
icdcode TEXT NOT NULL,
codeversion INTEGER NOT NULL,
description TEXT NOT NULL,
PRIMARY KEY (recordid)
)
/*
3 rows from diagnosiscodes table:
recordid icdcode codeversion description
0 0090 9 infectious colitis, enteritis, and gastroenteritis
1 01160 9 tuberculous pneumonia [any form], unspecified
2 01186 9 other specified pulmonary tuberculosis, tubercle bacilli not found by
bacteriological or histological examination, but tuberculosis confirmed by other methods [
inoculation of animals]
*/
Agent: value substring search(arguments={вҖқtableвҖқ:вҖқdiagnosiscodesвҖқ,вҖқcolumnвҖқ:вҖқdescription
вҖқ,вҖқvalueвҖқ:вҖқepilepsyвҖқ,вҖқkвҖқ:10})
Tool: Values in diagnosiscodes.description containing вҖҷepilepsyвҖҷ: [вҖҷepilepsy complicating
pregnancy, childbirth, or the puerperium, delivered, with mention of postpartum
complicationвҖҷ, вҖҷepilepsy, unspecified, without mention of intractable epilepsyвҖҷ, вҖҷepilepsia
partialis continua, with intractable epilepsyвҖҷ, вҖҷepilepsy complicating pregnancy, childbirth,
or the puerperium, unspecified as to episode of care or not applicableвҖҷ, вҖҷlocalizationвҲ’
related (focal) (partial) epilepsy and epileptic syndromes with complex partial seizures,
with intractable epilepsyвҖҷ, вҖҷgeneralized convulsive epilepsy, with intractable epilepsyвҖҷ, вҖҷ
localizationвҲ’related (focal) (partial) epilepsy and epileptic syndromes with complex partial
seizures, without mention of intractable epilepsyвҖҷ, вҖҷlocalizationвҲ’related (focal) (partial)
epilepsy and epileptic syndromes with simple partial seizures, without mention of
intractable epilepsyвҖҷ, вҖҷepilepsia partialis continua, without mention of intractable epilepsyвҖҷ,
вҖҷepilepsy complicating pregnancy, childbirth, or the puerperium, postpartum condition or
complicationвҖҷ].

46

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

Agent: sql execute(arguments={вҖқqueryвҖқ: вҖқSELECT MAX(mo.startdatetime) AS
most recent prescription FROM medicationorders mo WHERE mo.patientid = 10008287 AND
mo.medicationname = вҖҷcarbamazepineвҖҷ AND mo.startdatetime > (SELECT MIN(ad.
recordeddatetime) FROM admissiondiagnoses ad JOIN diagnosiscodes dc ON ad.icdcode =
dc.icdcode AND ad.codeversion = dc.codeversion WHERE ad.patientid = 10008287 AND dc.
description LIKE вҖҷ%epilepsy%вҖҷ);вҖқ})
Tool: [(None,)]
Agent: sql execute(arguments={вҖқqueryвҖқ: вҖқSELECT ad.recordeddatetime AS diagnosis time
FROM admissiondiagnoses ad JOIN diagnosiscodes dc ON ad.icdcode = dc.icdcode AND ad.
codeversion = dc.codeversion WHERE ad.patientid = 10008287 AND dc.description LIKE вҖҷ%
epilepsy%вҖҷ ORDER BY ad.recordeddatetime ASC LIMIT 1;вҖқ})
Tool: [(вҖҷ2100вҲ’10вҲ’09 01:17:00вҖҷ,)]
Agent: sql execute(arguments={вҖқqueryвҖқ: вҖқSELECT * FROM medicationorders WHERE
patientid = 10008287;вҖқ})
Tool: [(354, 10008287, 22168393, вҖҷ2100вҲ’10вҲ’10 09:00:00вҖҷ, вҖҷ2100вҲ’10вҲ’10 10:00:00вҖҷ, вҖҷbagвҖҷ, вҖҷ1.0вҖҷ, вҖҷ
bagвҖҷ, вҖҷivвҖҷ), (356, 10008287, 22168393, вҖҷ2100вҲ’10вҲ’10 07:00:00вҖҷ, вҖҷ2100вҲ’10вҲ’10 08:00:00вҖҷ, вҖҷbagвҖҷ, вҖҷ1.0вҖҷ,
вҖҷbagвҖҷ, вҖҷivвҖҷ), (655, 10008287, 22168393, вҖҷ2100вҲ’10вҲ’09 22:00:00вҖҷ, вҖҷ2100вҲ’10вҲ’11 01:00:00вҖҷ, вҖҷcefazolin
вҖҷ, вҖҷ1.0вҖҷ, вҖҷgвҖҷ, вҖҷivвҖҷ), ..., (6797, 10008287, 22168393, вҖҷ2100вҲ’10вҲ’09 22:00:00вҖҷ, вҖҷ2100вҲ’10вҲ’10 10:00:00вҖҷ,
вҖҷ0.9% sodium chlorideвҖҷ, вҖҷ1000.0вҖҷ, вҖҷmlвҖҷ, вҖҷivвҖҷ), (6804, 10008287, 22168393, вҖҷ2100вҲ’10вҲ’09 22:00:00вҖҷ,
вҖҷ2100вҲ’10вҲ’10 10:00:00вҖҷ, вҖҷ0.9% sodium chlorideвҖҷ, вҖҷ1000.0вҖҷ, вҖҷmlвҖҷ, вҖҷivвҖҷ)]
Agent: sql execute(arguments={вҖқqueryвҖқ: вҖқSELECT COUNT(*) AS count prescriptions FROM
medicationorders WHERE patientid = 10008287 AND medicationname = вҖҷcarbamazepineвҖҷ;вҖқ})
Tool: [(0,)]
Agent: The answer is <answer>No, patient 10008287 was not prescribed carbamazepine
after their first epilepsy diagnosis.</answer>
User: Ok, if carbamazepine wasnвҖҷt prescribed, can you check if they were prescribed any
other medications for epilepsy after their first epilepsy diagnosis? If so, give me the most
recent prescription time.
Agent: sql execute(arguments={вҖқqueryвҖқ: вҖқWITH first epi AS (SELECT MIN(ad.
recordeddatetime) AS dt FROM admissiondiagnoses ad JOIN diagnosiscodes dc ON ad.
icdcode = dc.icdcode AND ad.codeversion = dc.codeversion WHERE ad.patientid = 10008287
AND dc.description LIKE вҖҷ%epilepsy%вҖҷ) SELECT MAX(m.startdatetime) AS

47

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

most recent prescription FROM medicationorders m JOIN first epi f ON m.startdatetime > f.
dt WHERE m.patientid = 10008287 AND (m.medicationname LIKE вҖҷ%levetiracetam%вҖҷ OR m.
medicationname LIKE вҖҷ%phenytoin%вҖҷ OR m.medicationname LIKE вҖҷ%phenobarbital%вҖҷ OR m.
medicationname LIKE вҖҷ%valpro%вҖҷ OR m.medicationname LIKE вҖҷ%lamotr%вҖҷ OR m.
medicationname LIKE вҖҷ%gabapentin%вҖҷ OR m.medicationname LIKE вҖҷ%topir%вҖҷ OR m.
medicationname LIKE вҖҷ%pregabat%вҖҷ OR m.medicationname LIKE вҖҷ%ethosux%вҖҷ OR m.
medicationname LIKE вҖҷ%lacosamide%вҖҷ);вҖқ})
Tool: [(вҖҷ2100вҲ’10вҲ’12 20:00:00вҖҷ,)]
Agent: The answer is <answer>2100вҲ’10вҲ’12 20:00:00</answer>
User: Great! Just to be sure, this time represents the most recent time patient 10008287 was
prescribed any medication for epilepsy after their first diagnosis? I need the answer in the
exact time format recorded in the database.
Agent: Yes, that is correct. The most recent epilepsy medication prescription time after
their first epilepsy diagnosis is <answer>2100вҲ’10вҲ’12 20:00:00</answer>.
User: Perfect, thanks!
###END###

48

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

D.2.2

FAILED C ASE (A DAPT QA)

After the user initially asks about carbamazepine for epilepsy treatment for a specific patient, the
agent finds no relevant data. The user then asks about other medications for epilepsy. The agent
uses a web search tool to retrieve a list of medications, including levetiracetam. The agent writes
an SQL query using the diagnosis вҖңepilepsy, unspecifiedвҖқ and the medication list for the patient.
However, since the patient was diagnosed with вҖңepilepsy, unspecified, not intractable, without status
epilepticus,вҖқ the agent fails to retrieve the specific data needed, despite having the list of epilepsy
medications.

Instruction: Your goal is to explore patient data related to medication prescriptions.
Specifically, you are interested in patient ID 10008287 and want to know when they were
prescribed carbamazepine for epilepsy treatment. If the patient was prescribed
carbamazepine, you want to know the most recent prescription time after the first epilepsy
diagnosis. If the patient was not prescribed carbamazepine, you want to identify whether
any other class of medication used for epilepsy treatment was prescribed. If such
medications are found, you want to know the most recent prescription time after the first
epilepsy diagnosis. If no such medications are found, end the conversation. You want the
answer in the exact time format recorded in the database.
===
User: I want to know about the prescriptions for patient ID 10008287.
Agent: Could you please specify what information about the prescriptions you are
interested in? For example, are you looking for the medication names, dosages, dates, or
something else?
User: IвҖҷm interested in finding out if patient 10008287 was prescribed carbamazepine for
epilepsy. If they were, I need the most recent prescription time after their first epilepsy
diagnosis.
Agent: Okay, I need to find out if patient 10008287 has been diagnosed with epilepsy and
prescribed carbamazepine. Then, if both conditions are met, I need to find the most recent
prescription time for carbamazepine after the first epilepsy diagnosis. First, I need to find
the relevant tables containing diagnoses and medication orders.
Agent: table search(arguments={вҖқtool inputвҖқ: вҖқвҖқ})
Tool: admissiondiagnoses, admissionprocedures, clinicalevents, clinicalitemtypes,
costrecords, demographics, diagnosiscodes, hospitaladmissions, icuepisodes,
intakerecords, labresults, labtesttypes, medicationorders, microbiologyresults,
outputrecords, patienttransfers, procedurecodes

49

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

Agent: Okay, the tables admissiondiagnoses and medicationorders seem relevant. I need to
explore these tables to see how diagnoses and medication orders are recorded.
Agent: column search(arguments={вҖқtable namesвҖқ: вҖқadmissiondiagnoses, medicationorders
вҖқ})
Tool: CREATE TABLE admissiondiagnoses (
recordid INTEGER NOT NULL,
patientid INTEGER NOT NULL,
admissionid INTEGER NOT NULL,
icdcode TEXT NOT NULL,
codeversion INTEGER NOT NULL,
recordeddatetime TEXT NOT NULL,
PRIMARY KEY (recordid),
FOREIGN KEY (codeversion) REFERENCES diagnosiscodes (codeversion),
FOREIGN KEY (icdcode) REFERENCES diagnosiscodes (icdcode),
FOREIGN KEY (admissionid) REFERENCES hospitaladmissions (admissionid)
)
/*
3 rows from admissiondiagnoses table:
recordid patientid admissionid icdcode codeversion recordeddatetime
0 10035185 22580999 4139 9 2100вҲ’05вҲ’17 12:53:00
1 10035185 22580999 v707 9 2100вҲ’05вҲ’17 12:53:00
2 10035185 22580999 41401 9 2100вҲ’05вҲ’17 12:53:00
*/
CREATE TABLE medicationorders (
recordid INTEGER NOT NULL,
patientid INTEGER NOT NULL,
admissionid INTEGER NOT NULL,
startdatetime TEXT NOT NULL,
enddatetime TEXT,
medicationname TEXT NOT NULL,
dosevalue TEXT NOT NULL,
doseunit TEXT NOT NULL,
administrationroute TEXT NOT NULL,
PRIMARY KEY (recordid),
FOREIGN KEY (admissionid) REFERENCES hospitaladmissions (admissionid)
)
/*
3 rows from medicationorders table:

50

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

recordid patientid admissionid startdatetime enddatetime medicationname dosevalue
doseunit administrationroute
0 10020740 23831430 2100вҲ’04вҲ’19 11:00:00 2100вҲ’04вҲ’20 22:00:00 insulin 0.0 unit sc
1 10005817 20626031 2100вҲ’12вҲ’20 02:00:00 2100вҲ’12вҲ’21 12:00:00 insulin 0.0 unit sc
2 10005817 20626031 2100вҲ’12вҲ’27 10:00:00 2100вҲ’12вҲ’28 19:00:00 insulin 0.0 unit sc
*/
Agent: Now I need to find the icdcode for epilepsy in the diagnosiscodes table. I will use
value similarity search to find similar values to вҖқepilepsyвҖқ in the description column of the
diagnosiscodes table.
Agent: value similarity search(arguments={вҖқcolumnвҖқ: вҖқdescriptionвҖқ, вҖқtableвҖқ: вҖқ
diagnosiscodesвҖқ, вҖқvalueвҖқ: вҖқepilepsyвҖқ})
Tool: I found close matches in diagnosiscodes.description: [вҖҷepilepsy and recurrent seizures
вҖҷ, вҖҷepilepsy, unspecifiedвҖҷ, вҖҷother epilepsyвҖҷ, вҖҷepileptic spasmsвҖҷ, вҖҷepilepsy, unspecified, not
intractableвҖҷ, вҖҷepilepsy, unspecified, without mention of intractable epilepsyвҖҷ, вҖҷepilepsy,
unspecified, with intractable epilepsyвҖҷ, вҖҷepilepsy, unspecified, intractableвҖҷ, вҖҷother epilepsy
and recurrent seizuresвҖҷ, вҖҷepilepsy, unspecified, intractable, without status epilepticusвҖҷ, вҖҷ
epilepsy, unspecified, not intractable, without status epilepticusвҖҷ, вҖҷother epilepsy,
intractable, without status epilepticusвҖҷ, вҖҷepilepsy, unspecified, intractable, with status
epilepticusвҖҷ, вҖҷother epilepsy, intractable, with status epilepticusвҖҷ, вҖҷepilepsy, unspecified, not
intractable, with status epilepticusвҖҷ, вҖҷgeneralized idiopathic epilepsy and epileptic
syndromesвҖҷ, вҖҷother epilepsy, not intractable, without status epilepticusвҖҷ, вҖҷgeneralized
idiopathic epilepsy and epileptic syndromes, intractableвҖҷ].
Agent: The value similarity search returned several matches. To proceed, I will use вҖҷepilepsy
, unspecifiedвҖҷ as the diagnosis for epilepsy. Now I need to check if patient 10008287 was
diagnosed with вҖҷepilepsy, unspecifiedвҖҷ and prescribed вҖҷcarbamazepineвҖҷ. If so, I need to find
the most recent prescription time after the first epilepsy diagnosis.
Agent: value substring search(arguments={вҖқcolumnвҖқ: вҖқmedicationnameвҖқ, вҖқtableвҖқ: вҖқ
medicationordersвҖқ, вҖқvalueвҖқ: вҖқcarbamazepineвҖқ})
Tool: Values in medicationorders.medicationname containing вҖҷcarbamazepineвҖҷ: [вҖҷ
carbamazepineвҖҷ].
Agent: Okay, the medication name is вҖҷcarbamazepineвҖҷ. Now I have all the information I
need to construct the SQL query.
Agent: sql execute(arguments={вҖқqueryвҖқ: вҖқSELECT MAX(m.startdatetime) FROM
medicationorders m JOIN admissiondiagnoses a ON m.patientid = a.patientid WHERE m.

51

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

patientid = 10008287 AND m.medicationname = вҖҷcarbamazepineвҖҷ AND a.icdcode IN (SELECT
icdcode FROM diagnosiscodes WHERE description = вҖҷepilepsy, unspecifiedвҖҷ) AND m.
startdatetime > (SELECT MIN(recordeddatetime) FROM admissiondiagnoses a2 WHERE a2.
patientid = 10008287 AND a2.icdcode IN (SELECT icdcode FROM diagnosiscodes WHERE
description = вҖҷepilepsy, unspecifiedвҖҷ))вҖқ})
Tool: [(None,)]
Agent: The query returned None, which means either the patient was not diagnosed with
epilepsy, was not prescribed carbamazepine, or the prescription occurred before the
diagnosis.
Agent: sql execute(arguments={вҖқqueryвҖқ: вҖқSELECT MIN(recordeddatetime) FROM
admissiondiagnoses a WHERE a.patientid = 10008287 AND a.icdcode IN (SELECT icdcode
FROM diagnosiscodes WHERE description = вҖҷepilepsy, unspecifiedвҖҷ)вҖқ})
Tool: [(None,)]
Agent: Since the query to find the first epilepsy diagnosis returned None, it means the
patient was never diagnosed with epilepsy. Therefore, I cannot find the most recent
carbamazepine prescription time after the first epilepsy diagnosis.
Agent: sql execute(arguments={вҖқqueryвҖқ: вҖқSELECT DISTINCT patientid FROM
medicationorders WHERE medicationname = вҖҷcarbamazepineвҖҷ AND patientid = 10008287вҖқ)
Tool: []
Agent: The patient 10008287 was not prescribed carbamazepine. Therefore, I cannot find
the most recent carbamazepine prescription time after the first epilepsy diagnosis. <
answer>Patient 10008287 was not diagnosed with epilepsy and was not prescribed
carbamazepine.</answer>
User: Okay, if they werenвҖҷt prescribed carbamazepine, IвҖҷd like to know if they were
prescribed any other medications for epilepsy. If so, I want the most recent prescription
time after their first epilepsy diagnosis, just like I asked for carbamazepine.
Agent: Okay, I need to find out if patient 10008287 has been diagnosed with epilepsy. If
they have, I need to find any medications prescribed to them that are used to treat
epilepsy and then find the most recent prescription time for those medications after the
first epilepsy diagnosis. First, I need to identify medications used to treat epilepsy. I will
use a web search for this.

52

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

Agent: web search(arguments={вҖқqueryвҖқ: вҖқmedications used to treat epilepsyвҖқ})
Tool: [
вҖқBelow is a list of some of the most common brandвҲ’name drugs currently used to treat
epilepsy. Your doctor may prefer that you take the brand name of anticonvulsant and not
the generic substitution. Talk with your doctor about this important issue.\n\
nBrivaracetam (Briviact)\n\nCannabidiol (Epidiolex)\n\nCarbamazepine (Carbatrol or
Tegretol)\n\nCenobamate(Xcopri)\n\nDiazepam (Valium), lorazepam (Ativan) and similar
benzodiazepine tranquilizers such as clonazepam (Klonopin)\n\nEslicarbazepine (Aptiom
) [...] Ethosuximide (Zarontin)\n\nFelbamate (Felbatol)\n\nFenfluramine (Fintepla)\n\
nLacosamide (VIMPAT)\n\nLamotrigine (Lamictal)\n\nLevetiracetam (Keppra)\n\
nOxcarbazepine (Oxtellar XR, Trileptal)\n\nPerampanel (Fycompa)\n\nPhenobarbitol\n\
nPhenytoin (Dilantin)\n\nPregabalin (Lyrica)\n\nTiagabine (Gabitril)\n\nTopiramate (
Topamax)\n\nValproate, valproic acid (Depakene, Depakote)\n\nZonisamide (Zonegran)
[...] The most commonly used medications are benzodiazepines because they get into the
bloodstream quickly to start working on the brain to stop the seizure. They include:\n\n
## Epilepsy Drug Guidelines\n\nIt may take several months before the best drug and
dosage are determined for you. During this adjustment period, you will be carefully
monitored through frequent blood tests to measure your response to the medication.вҖқ,
вҖқBelow is a list of some of the most common brandвҲ’name drugs currently used to treat
epilepsy. Your doctor may prefer that you take the brand name of anticonvulsant and not
the generic substitution. Talk with your doctor about this important issue.\n\
nBrivaracetam (Briviact)\n\nCannabidiol (Epidiolex)\n\nCarbamazepine (Carbatrol or
Tegretol)\n\nCenobamate(Xcopri)\n\nDiazepam (Valium), lorazepam (Ativan) and similar
benzodiazepine tranquilizers such as clonazepam (Klonopin)\n\nEslicarbazepine (Aptiom
) [...] Ethosuximide (Zarontin)\n\nFelbamate (Felbatol)\n\nFenfluramine (Fintepla)\n\
nLacosamide (VIMPAT)\n\nLamotrigine (Lamictal)\n\nLevetiracetam (Keppra)\n\
nOxcarbazepine (Oxtellar XR, Trileptal)\n\nPerampanel (Fycompa)\n\nPhenobarbitol\n\
nPhenytoin (Dilantin)\n\nPregabalin (Lyrica)\n\nTiagabine (Gabitril)\n\nTopiramate (
Topamax)\n\nValproate, valproic acid (Depakene, Depakote)\n\nZonisamide (Zonegran)
[...] The most commonly used medications are benzodiazepines because they get into the
bloodstream quickly to start working on the brain to stop the seizure. They include:\n\n
## Epilepsy Drug Guidelines\n\nIt may take several months before the best drug and
dosage are determined for you. During this adjustment period, you will be carefully
monitored through frequent blood tests to measure your response to the medication.вҖқ,
вҖқMedications used to treat epilepsy are called antiepileptic drugs (AEDs). There are more
than 30 prescription AEDs on the market, and theyвҖҷre mostly available as oral tablets or
capsules.\n\nYour options depend on:\n\n## Types of antiepileptic drugs (AEDs)\n\
nThere are two types of medications for epilepsy:\n\nSome people may need to take
more than one medication to prevent seizures. [...] ### Levetiracetam (Elepsia XR, Keppra,
Keppra XR, Spritam)\n\nLevetiracetam (Elepsia XR, Keppra, Keppra XR, Spritam) may
treat a range of epileptic seizures, including:\n\nItвҖҷs available as a pill, an IV solution, an

53

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

oral solution, and an injection.\n\nLevetiracetam may cause fewer side effects than
other medications used for epilepsy. ItвҖҷs safe to take during pregnancy, according to
experts such as the United KingdomвҖҷs Commission on Human Medicines.\n\n###
Lorazepam (Ativan) [...] Lorazepam (Ativan) is a benzodiazepine thatвҖҷs used to treat all
types of seizures. ItвҖҷs also used to treat status epilepticus. Status epilepcticus is a
prolonged, critical seizure thatвҖҷs regarded as a medical emergency.\n\nItвҖҷs available as a
pill, an oral concentrate, and an injection.\n\n### Methsuximide (Celontin)\n\
nMethsuximide (Celontin) is used for absence seizures. ItвҖҷs prescribed when other
treatments donвҖҷt work in treating your seizures.вҖқ,
вҖқDonate\n\nPopular searches: Diagnosing Epilepsy Treatments and Therapies what is
epilepsy\n\nMake an Impact\n\nEpilepsy and Seizure Medications\n
================================\n\n#### Learn about FDAвҲ’approved medications to
treat epilepsy and seizures.\n\nImage 7: Epilepsy and Seizure Medications\n\nSearch\n\
nFilter Alphabetically Select Clear\n\nLoading ...\n\n##### Acetazolamide\n\nMore info(
Brand names: Diamox, Diamox Sequels, generics) [...] Acetazolamide (a SEET a ZOLE a
mide) has been FDAвҲ’approved for the treatment of, along with other drugs,
centrencephalic epilepsies (absence, generalized seizures).\n\n##### Brivaracetam\n\
nMore info(Brand names: Briviact)\n\nBrivaracetam (briv a RA se tam) has been
approved by the FDA to treat focal (partial) onset seizures in patients 1 month of age and
older.\n\n##### Cannibadiol\n\nMore info(Brand names: Epidiolex) [...] More info(Brand
names: Aptiom)\n\nEslicarbazepine acetate (ES li Kar BAZ e peen) has been approved by
the FDA to treat focal onset seizures in patients 4 years of age and older.\n\n#####
Ethosuximide\n\nMore info(Brand names: Zarontin, generics)\n\nEthosuximide (ETH oh
SUX i mide) has been approved by the FDA to control absence (petit mal) epilepsy.\n\n
##### Ethotoin\n\nMore info(Brand names: Peganone, generics)вҖқ,
вҖқHealthcare providers prescribe antiseizure medications to treat epilepsy and
symptomatic seizures. They also prescribe these medications to prevent and/or treat
seizures that happen during or following brain surgery. [...] Gray gradient\nGray gradient\
nSearch Icon Blue\nCleveland Clinic logo\n\n# Antiseizure Medications (Formerly Known
as Anticonvulsants)\n\nAntiseizure medications (anticonvulsants) help treat epilepsy
and other causes of seizures. They can treat other conditions as well, like anxiety and
neuropathic pain. There are several different types of antiseizure medications. You and
your healthcare provider will work together to find the best one for you.\n\
nAdvertisement [...] Cleveland Clinic is a nonвҲ’profit academic medical center. Advertising
on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse nonвҲ’Cleveland Clinic products
or services. Policy\n\n## Overview\n\n### What are antiseizure medications (
anticonvulsants)?\n\nAntiseizure medications (previously known as antiepileptic or
anticonvulsant medications) are prescription medications that help treat and prevent
seizures. Healthcare providers may prescribe these medications to treat other conditions
as well.вҖқ,
вҖқEpilepsy Website Logo\n\n# List of AntiвҲ’Seizure Medications (ASMs)\n\n####
Understanding Epilepsy\n\nAntiвҲ’epileptic drugs (ASMs) are the main form of treatment

54

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

for people living with epilepsy, with up to 70% (7 in 10 people) having their seizures
controlled through this medication.\n\nIn Australia there are over 20 ASMsare used to
treat seizures. The ASMsprescribed are often selected on the basis of the seizure type/s,
age, gender and side effects. ASMsmay be prescribed as tablets, syrups and liquids.вҖқ,
вҖқOne large randomized trial, the Standard and New Antiepileptic Drugs (SANAD) trial,
demonstrated some comparative advantages of certain AEDs when treating focal or
generalized epilepsy. In the end, when comparing valproate, lamotrigine, or topiramate
for generalized seizures, they recommended valproic acid as their firstвҲ’line choice.
Additionally, when comparing carbamazepine, gabapentin, lamotrigine, oxcarbazepine,
and topiramate for focal seizures, lamotrigine was cited as the firstвҲ’line [...] In summary,
it is now abundantly clear that antiвҲ’seizure medications wield disparate mechanistic
profiles, but they all effectively suppress epileptic seizures in one way or another.
Accordingly, grouping the drugs together by mechanism is a very helpful organizing
principle. From this viewpoint, it may become easier to appreciate that some drugs have
different efficacy profiles for different seizures types and epilepsy syndromes.
Ethosuximide is an exception with its specific limited use with [...] Phenytoin is one of the
oldest antiвҲ’seizure medications and is still widely used for focal and generalized
seizures. It is also administered for status epilepticus. In addition, practitioners may
invoke phenytoin as a secondвҲ’line agent for patients with mixed seizure types (e.g., tonic
вҲ’clonic and myoclonic). As mentioned, phenytoin blocks voltageвҲ’gated sodium channels,
but other possible mechanisms revolve around decreased synaptic transmission, smaller
changes in ionic gradients involving theвҖқ,
вҖқMedicines.\n Surgery.\n Therapies that stimulate the brain using a device.\n A
ketogenic diet.\n\n### Medication\n\nMost people with epilepsy can become seizureвҲ’
free by taking one antiвҲ’seizure medicine, which is also called an antiвҲ’epileptic medicine.
Others may be able to decrease the number and intensity of their seizures by taking
more than one medicine. [...] Tell your healthcare professional immediately if you notice
new or increased feelings of depression or suicidal thoughts. Also contact your
healthcare professional right away if you have changes in your mood or behaviors.\n Tell
your healthcare professional if you have migraines. You may need an antiвҲ’seizure
medicine that can prevent your migraines and treat epilepsy. [...] ### Potential future
treatments\n\nResearchers are studying many potential new treatments for epilepsy,
including:\n\n Continuous stimulation of the seizure onset zone, known as subthreshold
stimulation. Subthreshold stimulation is continuous stimulation to an area of the brain
below a level thatвҖҷs physically noticeable. This type of therapy appears to improve
seizure outcomes and quality of life for some people with seizures. Subthreshold
stimulation helps stop a seizure before it happens.вҖқ,
вҖқ| stiripentol | Diacomite | Image 50: Medline unavailable | Image 51: Medline unavailable
|\n| sulthiame | Ospolot | Image 52: Medline available | Image 53: Medline unavailable |\n
| tiagabine | Gabitril | Image 54: Medline available | Image 55: Medline available |\n|
topiramate | Topamax | Image 56: Medline available | Image 57: Medline available |\n|
vigabatrin | Sabril | Image 58: Medline available | Image 59: Medline available | [...] |

55

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

ethosuximide | Zarontin | Image 20: Medline available | Image 21: Medline available |\n|
felbamate | Felbatol | Image 22: Mims unavailable | Image 23: Medline available |\n|
gabapentin | Neurontin | Image 24: Medline available | Image 25: Medline available |\n|
lacosamide | Vimpat | Image 26: Medline available | Image 27: Medline available |\n|
lamotrigine | Lamictal | Image 28: Medline available | Image 29: Medline available | [...] |
phenobarbitone | Phenobarbitone | Image 40: Medline available | Image 41: Medline
unavailable |\n| phenytoin | Dilantin | Image 42: Medline available | Image 43: Medline
available |\n| potassium bromide | DibroвҲ’Be mono | Image 44: Medline unavailable |
Image 45: Medline unavailable |\n| primidone | Mysoline | Image 46: Medline available |
Image 47: Medline available |\n| sodium valproate | Epilim | Image 48: Medline available |
Image 49: Medline available |вҖқ,
вҖқSodium valproate is an epilepsy drug prescribed for all seizure types including absence,
myoclonus and tonic clonic seizures. New regulations have been introduced by the
Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) around the way in which
the drug, sodium valproate is prescribed to women and girls of childbearing age.\n\nLETвҖҷ
S STAY IN TOUCH... [...] The decision whether to start taking antiвҲ’epileptic drugs (AEDs)
can be difficult, and there is a lot to think about. Here we look at the benefits and risks of
taking, or not taking, AEDs.\n\nSodium valproate [...] Epilepsy Society\n\nSite
Navigation\n\nUtility Nav\n\nSite Search\n\nbreadcrumb navigation:\n\nList of antiвҲ’
seizure medication\n\nPublished on 8 October 2024\n\nUpdated: 7 April 2025\n\
nAuthored by Anonymous\n\nAlso in this section\n\nList of antiвҲ’seizure medication\n\
nHere is a list of antiвҲ’seizure medication (ASM), previously called antiвҲ’epileptic drugs or
AEDs.вҖқ
]
Agent: Based on the web search results, hereвҖҷs a list of medications commonly used to
treat epilepsy:
Brivaracetam
Cannabidiol
Carbamazepine
Cenobamate
Diazepam
Lorazepam
Clonazepam
Eslicarbazepine
Ethosuximide
Felbamate
Fenfluramine
Lacosamide
Lamotrigine
Levetiracetam
Oxcarbazepine

56

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

Perampanel
Phenobarbitol
Phenytoin
Pregabalin
Tiagabine
Topiramate
Valproate, valproic acid
Zonisamide
Acetazolamide
Methsuximide
Stiripentol
Sulthiame
Gabapentin
Primidone
Sodium valproate
I will now construct a query to find the most recent prescription time for any of these
medications after the first epilepsy diagnosis.
Agent: sql execute(arguments={вҖқqueryвҖқ: вҖқSELECT MAX(m.startdatetime) FROM
medicationorders m JOIN admissiondiagnoses a ON m.patientid = a.patientid WHERE m.
patientid = 10008287 AND m.medicationname IN (вҖҷbrivaracetamвҖҷ, вҖҷcannabidiolвҖҷ, вҖҷ
carbamazepineвҖҷ, вҖҷcenobamateвҖҷ, вҖҷdiazepamвҖҷ, вҖҷlorazepamвҖҷ, вҖҷclonazepamвҖҷ, вҖҷeslicarbazepineвҖҷ, вҖҷ
ethosuximideвҖҷ, вҖҷfelbamateвҖҷ, вҖҷfenfluramineвҖҷ, вҖҷlacosamideвҖҷ, вҖҷlamotrigineвҖҷ, вҖҷlevetiracetamвҖҷ, вҖҷ
oxcarbazepineвҖҷ, вҖҷperampanelвҖҷ, вҖҷphenobarbitolвҖҷ, вҖҷphenytoinвҖҷ, вҖҷpregabalinвҖҷ, вҖҷtiagabineвҖҷ, вҖҷ
topiramateвҖҷ, вҖҷvalproateвҖҷ, вҖҷvalproic acidвҖҷ, вҖҷzonisamideвҖҷ, вҖҷacetazolamideвҖҷ, вҖҷmethsuximideвҖҷ, вҖҷ
stiripentolвҖҷ, вҖҷsulthiameвҖҷ, вҖҷgabapentinвҖҷ, вҖҷprimidoneвҖҷ, вҖҷsodium valproateвҖҷ) AND a.icdcode IN (
SELECT icdcode FROM diagnosiscodes WHERE description = вҖҷepilepsy, unspecifiedвҖҷ) AND m.
startdatetime > (SELECT MIN(recordeddatetime) FROM admissiondiagnoses a2 WHERE a2.
patientid = 10008287 AND a2.icdcode IN (SELECT icdcode FROM diagnosiscodes WHERE
description = вҖҷepilepsy, unspecifiedвҖҷ))вҖқ})
Tool: [(None,)]
Agent: The query returned None, which means either the patient was not diagnosed with
epilepsy, was not prescribed any of the listed medications, or the prescriptions occurred
before the diagnosis. Since I already determined that the patient was not diagnosed with
epilepsy, the result is None. <answer>Patient 10008287 was not diagnosed with epilepsy
and was not prescribed any antiвҲ’epileptic medications.</answer>
User: Could you double check that your answer covers everything? I wanted to know if
patient 10008287 was prescribed carbamazepine and, if not, if they were prescribed any

57

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

other epilepsy meds. For any epilepsy meds, I need the most recent prescription time after
their first epilepsy diagnosis.
Agent: Yes, I have confirmed that patient 10008287 was neither diagnosed with epilepsy
nor prescribed carbamazepine or any other antiвҲ’epileptic medications from the list I
generated using a web search. Therefore, I cannot provide a prescription time after their
first epilepsy diagnosis. <answer>Patient 10008287 was not diagnosed with epilepsy and
was not prescribed carbamazepine or any other antiвҲ’epileptic medications.</answer>
User: ###END###

58

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

D.3

I NVALIDATED T RAJECTORIES BY THE VALIDATOR

Below we show sample trajectories that were invalidated by our simulation validator along with the
specific rules they violated.
D.3.1

V IOLATION OF N O F INAL C HECK RULE

Instruction: Your goal is to find the administration routes of specific ordered medications.
Specifically, you are interested in the administration routes of ordered medications
containing ISDN. You want to search for isosorbide dinitrate specifically, not other similar
medications like \вҖқisosorbide mononitrate\вҖқ When querying the DB agent, since you do not
know how isosorbide dinitrate is stored, use common terms like \вҖқISDN\вҖқ when referring
to it, and let the DB agent find it for you.
===
User: IвҖҷm trying to figure out how certain meds are given to patients. Can you help?
Agent: I can help with that. Could you please specify which medications you are interested
in and what information about their administration you would like to know? For example,
are you interested in the dosage, frequency, or route of administration?
(...omitted...)
Agent: The administration route for isosorbide dinitrate is вҖҷpo/ngвҖҷ. This likely refers to oral
or nasogastric administration.
User: ###END### (RULE VIOLATION)
вҶ’ Before ending the conversation, ask the DB agent to double check that their final answer
covers all goals raised. If not, request any missing parts.

D.3.2

V IOLATION OF M ISSING CONDITIONS RULE

Instruction: Your goal is to find information related to a patientвҖҷs diagnosis. Specifically,
you are interested in patient ID 10004733 and you want to know how many days have
passed since the patient was diagnosed with cerebral artery occlusion during the current
hospital admission. If the patient has multiple records of the same diagnosis, you want to
know the number of days elapsed since the earliest diagnosis. You want diagnosis names
containing cerebral artery occlusion.
===

59

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

User: IвҖҷm trying to find out some information about a patientвҖҷs diagnosis.
Agent: I can help with that. What specific information are you looking for regarding a
patientвҖҷs diagnosis? For example, are you trying to find:
вҲ’ A patientвҖҷs diagnosis history?
вҲ’ The most common diagnoses?
вҲ’ Diagnoses associated with certain procedures or medications?
вҲ’ The cost associated with a particular diagnosis?
вҲ’ Something else entirely?
Please provide more details so I can narrow down my search.
User: IвҖҷm interested in patient ID 10004733. I want to know how long ago they were
diagnosed with something.
Agent: Okay, I can help you find out how long ago patient ID 10004733 was diagnosed. Let
me first check the admissiondiagnoses table to see if it contains the diagnosis date and
patient ID.
User: ###END### (RULE VIOLATION)
вҶ’ The user must provide all detailed conditions specified in the instruction before ending
the conversation.

D.3.3

V IOLATION OF P ERFORMING AGENT- LIKE TASKS RULE

Instruction: Your goal is to find the number of blood culture tests performed on a specific
patient. Specifically, you want to know how many culture tests were collected from
venipuncture blood for patient ID 031вҲ’10300 this month.
===
User: I need to figure out how many blood culture tests a particular patient has had.
Agent: To determine the number of blood culture tests, I need the patientвҖҷs ID. Could you
please provide the patient ID?
User: The patient ID is 031вҲ’10300.
(...omitted...)
Agent: The patient with ID 031вҲ’10300 had 2 blood culture tests collected from venipuncture
blood.

60

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

User: Okay, I have the patient ID, the time frame (this month), and the collection method (
venipuncture blood). Does your request include any other conditions? (RULE VIOLATION)
вҶ’ The user acts like a DB agent or AI assistant instead of the user (e.g., writing, reviewing,
or executing SQL queries, calling external APIs, or responding to the DB agent in a machine
assistant way).

61

