Overview of the EHRSQL 2024 Shared Task on
Reliable Text-to-SQL Modeling on Electronic Health Records
Gyubok Lee

Sunjun Kweon Seongsu Bae Edward Choi
KAIST AI
{gyubok.lee, sean0042, seongsu, edwardchoi}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

arXiv:2405.06673v2 [cs.CL] 23 May 2024

Electronic Health Records (EHRs) are relational databases that store the entire medical
histories of patients within hospitals. They
record numerous aspects of patientsвҖҷ medical
care, from hospital admission and diagnosis to
treatment and discharge. While EHRs are vital
sources of clinical data, exploring them beyond
a predefined set of queries requires skills in
query languages like SQL. To make information retrieval more accessible, one strategy is
to build a question-answering system, possibly
leveraging text-to-SQL models that can automatically translate natural language questions
into corresponding SQL queries and use these
queries to retrieve the answers. The EHRSQL
2024 shared task aims to advance and promote
research in developing a question-answering
system for EHRs using text-to-SQL modeling, capable of reliably providing requested
answers to various healthcare professionals to
improve their clinical work processes and satisfy their needs. Among more than 100 participants who applied to the shared task, eight
teams were formed and completed the entire
shared task requirement and demonstrated a
wide range of methods to effectively solve this
task. In this paper, we describe the task of reliable text-to-SQL modeling, the dataset, and
the methods and results of the participants. We
hope this shared task will spur further research
and insights into developing reliable questionanswering systems for EHRs.

1

Introduction

Electronic Health Records (EHRs) store all types of
medical events that occur in the hospital, including
admissions, diagnoses, procedures, prescriptions,
and discharges. They replace traditional paperbased records and provide a centralized repository
for patient data. Over the years, the widespread
adoption of EHRs in hospitals has been shown to
improve patient care, increase efficiency, and enhance coordination among healthcare profession-

als (Upadhyay and Hu, 2022; Mullins et al., 2020;
Uslu et al., 2021). Although EHRs are a valuable
source of patient data, the complexity of their data
structures and the need for specialized skills, such
as query languages like SQL, to extract and analyze the information, often hinder their effective
utilization by healthcare professionals (Wang et al.,
2020; Lee et al., 2022). These barriers lead to the
underutilization of the full potential of EHRs in
clinical practice and research.
An alternative way to utilize data stored in EHRs
is to develop a question-answering (QA) system.
QA systems provide a user-friendly interface that
allows healthcare professionals to ask questions in
natural language and receive answers (e.g., simple
patient information retrieval or complex synthesis
of patient information across multiple tables) from
the EHR data without needing to know query languages or EHR database structures. Specifically,
text-to-SQL modeling is an effective approach for
building such QA systems for EHRs, which are typically relational databases. These models automatically convert natural language questions into their
corresponding SQL queries and then execute these
queries on the database to obtain the final answer.
With the impressive advances in large language
models (LLMs), various high-performance textto-SQL models have been introduced, which are
accomplished through model fine-tuning (Scholak
et al., 2021) or LLM prompting with demonstrations (Pourreza and Rafiei, 2024; Gao et al., 2023;
Chang and Fosler-Lussier, 2023). If deployed with
reliable performance, the adoption of these models
could significantly benefit healthcare professionals by allowing them to explore patient data more
freely from the EHRs through natural language
interactions.
Several datasets for question-answering on
EHRs have been introduced, including MIMICSQL (Wang et al., 2020), emrKBQA (Raghavan
et al., 2021), and EHRSQL (Lee et al., 2022).

Answer

Readi-cat 2 (barium
sulfate 2% suspension)

EHR
21.1 days

Natural Language
Question

I am not able to answer
based on the EHR

SELECT drug FROM prescriptions
WHERE subject_id= 10027602 AND
starttime=(SELECT MAX(starttime)
FROM prescriptions WHERE
subject_id= 10027602);

What medication was last prescribed to
patient 10027602?

Tell me the length of the last hospital stay of
patient 10027602.

SQL
Execution

Reliable
Text-to-SQL
Model

What are the side effects of
long term insulin administration?

SELECT strftime('%J',
admissions.dischtime) strftime('%J',
admissions.admittime) FROM
admissions WHERE
admissions.subject_id = 10027602
AND admissions.dischtime IS NOT
NULL ORDER BY admissions.admittime
DESC LIMIT 1;

Not answerable

Figure 1: Overview of reliable text-to-SQL modeling on EHRs. For any input questions, a reliable text-to-SQL
model should accurately predict SQL queries for what it can and abstain from what it cannot, such as for intrinsically
unanswerable questions or ones that are likely to be answered incorrectly by the model. Successfully developing
such a model can serve as a valuable tool for healthcare professionals in hospitals, providing better accessibility to
patient data and assisting in clinical decision-making.

EHRSQL, in particular, poses unique challenges.
It is the first dataset to compile a collection of questions that reflect the diverse needs of healthcare
professionals, including physicians, nurses, and
hospital administrative staff. It contains extensive
use of time expressions and includes SQL queries
of increased complexity, which better reflect the
real needs of a hospital setting. The SQL queries
are linked to two open-source EHR databases1 ,
MIMIC-III (Johnson et al., 2016) and eICU (Pollard et al., 2018), retaining incompatible ones as
unanswerable questions in the dataset (used to test
a modelвҖҷs ability to abstain). Starting from their
collected real-world questions, this shared task
presents more up-to-date changes to the text-toSQL modeling (use of MIMIC-IV and new paraphrases for questions) and more challenging problem settings (new data splitting and additional unanswerable questions). The dataset for this shared
task is publicly available at https://github.com/
1

SQL queries are database-dependent, meaning that even
though a question attempts to retrieve the same information,
the location of that information can vary across databases. For
example, to list all drugs in MIMIC-III, you would use SELECT
drug FROM prescriptions, whereas in eICU, it would be
SELECT drugname FROM medication.

glee4810/ehrsql-2024. The shared task platform is hosted on Codabench at https://www.
codabench.org/competitions/1889/.
In this paper, we present the EHRSQL 2024
shared task and its dataset in Sections 2 and 3,
respectively. Section 4 introduces the evaluation
metric and baseline model for the task. Section 5
describes the methods proposed by the participating teams and discusses interesting findings from
the official results.

2

Task - Reliable Text-to-SQL Modeling

The goal of the EHRSQL 2024 shared task is to develop a reliable QA system for EHRs, specifically
through text-to-SQL modeling. Reliability is crucial for the deployment of AI systems, especially
in safety-critical domains like hospitals, where incorrect predictions can have severe consequences.
The term reliability in question answering refers
to the systemвҖҷs preference for abstention over providing an incorrect answer (Whitehead et al., 2022;
Chen et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2024). In this shared
task, we adopt the definition of reliable text-to-SQL
from TrustSQL (Lee et al., 2024), which expands
the scope of reliability to include unanswerable

EHRSQL (Lee et al., 2022)
SQL Annotation
(MIMIC-IV Schema)

>200 Hospital
Staff

Question Utterances
from the Poll

Question
Templates

Question
Paraphrases
Using ChatGPT

(Question, SQL) Pairs
for MIMIC-IV Demo
+
Unanswerable
Questions

Value
Sampling

MIMIC-IV
Demo

Figure 2: Data construction process of the EHRSQL shared task.

questions. A reliable text-to-SQL model should not
only correctly generate SQL queries, providing utility, but also abstain from answering questions that
are likely to be incorrect or unanswerable, thereby
minimizing harm. This objective contrasts with
most other text-to-SQL tasks, where the primary
focus is to maximize SQL generation performance
for answerable questions only. Further discussion
on specific scenarios of measuring reliability for
text-to-SQL is explained in Section 4.1.

3

Dataset Construction

In this section, we outline the key steps to generate data for the shared task. The overall data construction pipeline is illustrated in Figure 2. Each
subsection provides a detailed explanation of each
step.
3.1

Question Templates from EHRSQL

To construct the shared task data, we started from
a pool of questions that reflect the real needs of
diverse healthcare professionals in EHRSQL (Lee
et al., 2022). This dataset is derived from the results
of a poll conducted with more than 200 professionals at a university hospital in South Korea. The
collected questions are those that the professionals would ask an AI speaker if it could access and
synthesize structured information stored in EHRs
(i.e., records in tabular form). The authors then
translated the raw question utterances and removed
duplicates to distill them into question templates.
This shared task leverages the question templates
collected in EHRSQL to generate diverse and realistic question-SQL pairs.
3.2

MIMIC-IV3 (Johnson et al., 2020) to construct
question-SQL pairs. The demo version contains
records of 100 patients from the full MIMIC-IV
database and has the same database schema as the
full MIMIC-IV. It is openly available for anyone
who is interested in using the dataset without special training4 , which allows the use of commercial
APIs. Since the demo database schema is identical
to that of the full database, the same query can be
used to retrieve information from both the full and
demo versions.

SQL Queries Linked to MIMIC-IV Demo

Unlike the original EHRSQL dataset, whose SQL
queries are based on value-shuffled MIMIC-III and
eICU2 , this shared task uses the demo version of
2
This process was done to further de-identify the questionSQL pairs for public release. Please refer to more detailed
reasons in the original paper.

3.3

New Question Paraphrases

We found that the style and naturalness of paraphrases generated by current LLMs, like ChatGPT,
surpass the paraphrases in EHRSQL, which are
produced through both human and machine efforts.
To improve the quality of the paraphrases for each
question template, we employed ChatGPT to generate new paraphrases that are more natural and
conversational. We then manually reviewed all new
paraphrases to ensure they maintain the intended
meaning of the original question templates.
3.4

Challenging Unanswerable Questions

A recent study revealed that unanswerable questions in the EHRSQL dataset can mostly be filtered out using a combination of N-gram and beam
search score filtering (Yang et al., 2024). This is
primarily because the unanswerable questions in
EHRSQL were collected erroneously due to human errors during the polling process5 , resulting
in limited diversity. To increase the difficulty of
the task, we combined the original unanswerable
3
https://physionet.org/content/mimic-iv-demo/
2.2/
4
The full MIMIC-IV dataset requires researchers to complete the Collaborative Institutional Training Initiative (CITI)
training before accessing the data.
5
The poll participants were initially provided with examples of inappropriate questions for the system, including those
requiring external knowledge, ambiguous or qualitative statements, and questions about the reasons behind certain clinical
decisions.

questions with those from the EHRSQL portion
of TrustSQL (Lee et al., 2024), which contains adversarially created unanswerable questions, such
as those referring to non-existent columns and requests that exceed SQL functionalities.
3.5

New Data Split

In real-world scenarios, text-to-SQL models can encounter questions that are answerable based on the
EHR schema but have not been seen in the training
set (i.e., unseen SQL with respect to the training
set). This situation can lead to increased confusion
for the model in distinguishing between answerable
and unanswerable questions. Unlike the original
EHRSQL, where answerable questions were split
in an identically distributed (IID) manner, we split
the shared task data to include both seen and unseen question templates (or SQL structures) in the
validation and test sets. For unanswerable questions, the original unanswerable questions from
EHRSQL were distributed across all splits (training, validation, and test), while new unanswerable
questions were added exclusively to the validation
and test sets to increase the taskвҖҷs difficulty. Each of
these splits has a 20% proportion of unanswerable
questions. Table 1 shows the number of question
templates and the size of each data split6 . The
training and validation sets were made available
during the development phase (Jan 29, 2024 - Mar
26, 2024), and the test set was made available for
the three-day test phase (Mar 26, 2024 - Mar 28,
2024).

4

Evaluation

4.1

Evaluation Metric

We selected the evaluation metric that best aligns
with our shared taskвҖҷs purpose: building reliable
text-to-SQL models. These models aim to accurately predict correct SQL queries for answerable questions, identify unanswerable questions,
6
Even if the MIMIC-IV demo includes only 100 patients, a
wide variety of question templates can exist. Consider patient
ID 100 and two question templates: вҖҳWhat is patient 100вҖҷs
gender?вҖҷ and вҖҳWhat is patient 100вҖҷs last blood pressure?вҖҷ The
data splitting in text-to-SQL for EHRs does not have to be
done by patient, such as вҖҳWhat is patient 100вҖҷs gender?вҖҷ in the
training set and вҖҳTell me patient 200вҖҷs sex?вҖҷ in the validation
set, because the task could become relatively easy. Instead, it
might include вҖҳWhat is patient 100вҖҷs gender?вҖҷ in the training
set and вҖҳWhat is patient 100вҖҷs last blood pressure?вҖҷ in the
validation set. A more challenging and realistic goal of textto-SQL is to assess how well the model can generate SQL
queries for both question templates (or SQL structures) that it
has seen and those it has not seen. In this example, we show
four question samples with two question templates.

Dev Phase

Test Phase

Train
Valid
Test
Answerable
100
134
134
question template (100 seen) (100 seen + 34 unseen) (100 seen + 34 unseen)
Answerable
4674
931
934
samples
Unanswerable
450
232
233
samples
Total samples

5124

1163

1167

Table 1: Data statistics for the shared task. All text-toSQL data used in the shared task is based on MIMIC-IV.

and minimize both incorrect SQL predictions for
answerable questions and the generation of SQL
queries for unanswerable questions, without abstaining. More concretely, we adopt the Reliability Score (RS) for reliable text-to-SQL (Lee et al.,
2024), formally written as follows:
пЈұ
1
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈІ0
RS(c)(x) = вҲ’c
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
вҲ’c
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈі
1

if x вҲҲ Qans ; g(x) = 1; Acc(x) = 1,
if x вҲҲ Qans ; g(x) = 0,
if x вҲҲ Qans ; g(x) = 1; Acc(x) = 0,
if x вҲҲ Quna ; g(x) = 1,
if x вҲҲ Quna ; g(x) = 0,
(1)

where Qans and Quna denote answerable and unanswerable questions, respectively. g(x) = 1 implies
that the model selects its SQL generation as the final answer, whereas g(x) = 0 implies that the model
abstains. Acc(x) measures the accuracy of the generated SQL using execution accuracy, which is 1 if
the answers returned by both the ground-truth and
predicted SQL queries match, and 0 otherwise.
The RS has five different cases for assigning the
score:
вҖў A score of 1 is assigned if SQL is correctly
generated by the model for answerable questions.
вҖў A score of 0 is assigned if the model abstains
from generating SQL for answerable questions.
вҖў A score of вҲ’c is assigned if the model predicts
incorrect SQL for answerable questions.
вҖў A score of вҲ’c is assigned if the model attempts to predict SQL for unanswerable questions.
вҖў A score of 1 is assigned if the model accurately detects unanswerable questions by abstaining.

Team

Affiliation

Paper

Code

1

LG AI Research & KAIST

LG AI Research & KAIST, South Korea

Jo et al. (2024)

1

2

PromptMind

-

Gundabathula and Kolar (2024)

2

3

ProbGate

KAIST, South Korea

Kim et al. (2024b)

3

4

KU-DMIS

Korea university, South Korea

Kim et al. (2024a)

4

5

AIRI NLP

AIRI, Russia

Somov et al. (2024)

5

6

LTRC-IIITH

IIIT Hyderabad, India

Thomas et al. (2024)

6

7

Saama Technologies

Saama Technologies, USA

Jabir et al. (2024)

7

8

Project PRIMUS

SUST, Bangladesh

Joy et al. (2024)

8

1

https://github.com/sylee0520/ehrsql-2024 (private)
https://github.com/satyakesav/ehrsql-clinicalnlp-2024 (private)
3
https://github.com/venzino-han/probgate_ehrsql
4
https://github.com/Chanwhistle/EHRSQL_NACCL
5
https://github.com/runnerup96/EHRSQL-text2sql-solution
6
https://github.com/jr-john/ehrsql_2024 (private)
7
https://github.com/upjabir/ehrsql_2024
7
https://github.com/joy-2019331037/nlpConference
2

Table 2: Participating teams, affiliation, paper, and code.

The overall RS is calculated by taking the average of sample-level scores, represented as percentages. The penalty, c, is chosen depending on the
reliability requirements of the model. A penalty
of 0, RS(0), means no punishment for incorrect
predictions, a penalty of 10; RS(10), represents a
moderately rigorous scenario, and a penalty of N;
RS(N), where N refers to the evaluation data size,
is the most rigorous scenario in which even a single mistake outweighs all correct predictions and
abstentions. The maximum possible RS is 100%,
and the minimum possible scores vary depending
on the penalties: 0 for c = 0; вҲ’1000% for c = 10;
вҲ’100N % for c = N . The main evaluation metric
for the shared task is RS(10), where every ten accurate predictions weigh the same as one incorrect
prediction.

conducted a careful review to ensure that the provided code and the methods described in the fact
sheets were consistent.

5

Official Results

4.2

5.1

Participating Teams

Code Verification and Fact Sheet

The participants shared their code and the fact sheet
following the instructions provided in Appendix A.
The purpose of the fact sheet was to collect a brief
summary of the participantsвҖҷ methods, including
any use of pre-trained models or external data. For
code verification, participants had the option to submit their code either via email or through GitHub
repositories. These repositories could be public or
private, as long as access was granted to the task
organizers. Upon receiving the submissions, we

4.3

Baseline Model

For the baseline, we employ the simplest method,
denoted as A BSTAIN -A LL, which abstains from
answering all questions. When evaluating in the
RS, regardless of the penalty, abstaining from all
questions results in an overall score of 20%. This
score is earned by correctly abstaining from answering unanswerable questions. This is not a trivial
score, particularly as the penalty for incorrect predictions increases, which can severely harm the
overall score.

The EHRSQL shared task attracted over 100 participants from both academia and industry. Of these,
8 teams submitted their code and fact sheet. Table 2
lists the participating teams, their affiliations, the
code submission status, and their working papers.
5.2

Methods and Results

Table 3 presents the official results for each team,
along with short descriptions of their methods. All
the proposed methods are categorized into two

Team

RS(0)

RS(10)

RS(N)

Modeling Type

Ensemble

Fine-tuned

Model Used

1

LG AI Research & KAIST

88.17

81.32

-711.83

Unified

No

Yes

ChatGPT

2

PromptMind

82.6

74.89

-817.4

Unified

Yes

Yes

GPT-4, ChatGPT, Claude Opus

3

ProbGate

81.92

74.21

-818.08

Unified

No

Yes

ChatGPT

4

KU-DMIS

72.07

59.21

-1427.93

Unified

No

Yes

ChatGPT

5

AIRI NLP

68.89

44.04

-2831.11

Pipeline

No

Yes

T5-3B, Logistic Regression

6

LTRC-IIITH

66.84

43.7

-2633.16

Pipeline

No

Yes

SQLCoder-7b-2

7

Saama Technologies

53.21

36.08

-1946.79

Pipeline

Yes

Yes

Decision Trees, CodeLlama-7b, ChatGPT

8

Project PRIMUS

14.14

-713.37

-84.9K

Unified

No

No

SQLCoder-7b-2

-

A BSTAIN -A LL

20.0

20.0

20.0

No

No

No

-

Table 3: Official result. A BSTAIN -A LL is the baseline for the shared task, explained in Section 4.3. вҖҳEnsembleвҖҷ
denotes the use of any ensemble methods in either unanswerable question detection or SQL generation with
abstention. вҖҳFine-tunedвҖҷ indicates whether any pre-trained models were further trained for SQL generation or
abstention purposes. вҖҳPipeline-basedвҖҷ means the use of multiple methods in a sequence, such as a pipeline that
consists of an answerability detector, an SQL generator, and subsequently an SQL error detector.

types: unified approaches and pipeline-based approaches (see вҖҳModeling TypeвҖҷ in Table 3). The unified approach leverages LLMs to perform both SQL
generation and abstention, while the pipeline-based
approach involves building a series of specialized,
smaller models to ensure reliability as one system (e.g., detection of unanswerable questions, followed by SQL generation and error detection). The
overall observations are as follows: 1) Even when
utilizing the same backbone LLM (e.g., ChatGPT),
the results vary depending on how it is used; 2)
Methods that fall under the unified approach tend to
outperform those in the pipeline-based approaches.
However, leveraging LLMs in a pipeline-based
manner has not been fully explored; 3) Teams
with smaller discrepancies between the RS with
different penalties (e.g., the gap between RS(0) and
RS(10)) tend to rank higher, indicating that minimizing incorrect SQL predictions through effective
abstention mechanisms is crucial for higher performance in this task; 4) Teams that fine-tuned LLMs
on the training data, whether they used generalpurpose (e.g., ChatGPT) or code-specialized models (e.g., CodeLLama), performed well, highlighting the importance of domain-specific fine-tuning
in this task; 5) Test-time pseudo-label fine-tuning
seems quite effective in fixed benchmarking scenarios, which might not be directly applicable in
real-time deployment. More details about each
method by the two different modeling types are
discussed in the following paragraphs.

Unified approach. Five teams utilized methods under the unified approach. The LG AI Research & KAIST team achieved the best results,
scoring 81.32 in RS(10) by using self-training
LLMs (Amini et al., 2022; Yuan et al., 2024) with
pseudo-labeling for unanswerable questions. The
PromptMind team implemented an ensemble of
LLMs, including fine-tuned ChatGPT, GPT-4, and
Claude Opus. When generating SQL, they employed two retrievers (one for the general domain
and another for the medical domain) to retrieve
similar question-SQL pairs from the training set.
They selected SQL generation as the final prediction only if all three models unanimously agreed;
otherwise, the SQL prediction was abstained. The
ProbGate team employed fine-tuned ChatGPT with
log-probability thresholding and error handling for
abstention, where the threshold was set heuristically based on the ratio of unanswerable questions
in the validation set. The KU-DMIS team took a
two-step procedure. First, they generated pseudo
question-SQL pairs to align their models to the test
set distribution using the training set and question
templates from the original EHRSQL data. Then,
they fine-tuned ChatGPT on the newly generated
dataset. Abstention was achieved by sampling multiple SQL predictions for each input question and
abstaining if the outputs were not consistent. The
Project PRIMUS team used SQLCoder-7b-2 for direct generation of SQL and abstention labels (null)
through in-context learning.

Pipeline-based approach. Three teams adopted
the pipeline-based approach. The AIRI NLP team
constructed a pipeline where they initially used logistic regression to detect unanswerable questions,
then generated SQL with a fine-tuned T5-3B (Raffel et al., 2020), and finally checked the executability of the generated SQL for final abstention. The
LTRC-IIITH team used two different SQLCoder7b-2 models, one for detecting unanswerable questions followed by the other for SQL generation. For
final abstention, they utilized the log-probabilities
from the SQL generator to detect potential errors
in SQL generation, followed by an executability
check of the SQL. The Saama Technologies team
began with an ensemble of unanswerable question
detectors, including multinomial naive Bayes, SGD
classifier, CatBoost (Prokhorenkova et al., 2018),
and CodeLlama-7b (Roziere et al., 2023). They
then generated SQL using CodeLlama-7b and finally used a ChatGPT-based answer selector for
final abstention.

6

Conclusion

With the increasing volume of data stored in
EHRs and the impressive advances in LLMs, the
EHRSQL 2024 shared task provides participants
with an opportunity to develop and test their creative methods for building reliable QA systems on
EHRs using text-to-SQL modeling. The dataset for
this shared task presents unique challenges, including questions that extensively use time expressions
and the increased complexity of SQL queries, reflecting the varied needs of different hospital professionals. It also includes challenging unanswerable questions that should be avoided to enhance
the systemвҖҷs reliability. These aspects distinguish
this shared task from most other text-to-SQL challenges, as it requires not only generating correct
SQL queries that reflect the actual needs (providing
utility) but also abstaining from answering questions that are likely to be answered incorrectly or
are unanswerable (minimizing harm), which is especially crucial in the real deployment of the system in clinical settings.
The shared task attracted over 100 participants
from academia and industry, with 8 teams ultimately submitting their code and fact sheets. As a
novel task at the intersection of NLP and clinical
domains, it triggered a variety of newly proposed
methods. These methods included self-training
LLMs through pseudo-labeling unanswerable ques-

tions, ensembling different LLMs with an abstention option, generating synthetic question-SQL
pairs to handle distribution shifts from training to
test sets, leveraging log-probabilities for abstention,
and deploying pipeline-based approaches with specialized models for correct SQL generation and
abstention. Most teams achieved positive scores
(more utility than harm) in the moderately rigorous
setting (i.e., RS(10), where one mistake weighs as
much as ten correct predictions), which was the
main evaluation metric.
However, none of the proposed models have yet
achieved positive scores in RS(N) (where even one
incorrect prediction outweighs the rest of the predictions being correct), indicating that they are still
far from being completely reliable. We hope that
this shared task, emphasizing reliability, will encourage further research into building QA systems
that can truly serve as valuable tools for healthcare
professionals, improving clinical decision-making,
facilitating clinical research, and enhancing patient
care quality. Future research directions include developing models that can achieve positive scores in
RS(N) and expanding reliable question answering
for EHRs to multimodal settings by incorporating
clinical notes, X-ray images, and ECG signals.

Limitations
This shared task does not represent all types of answerable and unanswerable questions encountered
in hospital settings. Additionally, this shared task
employs MIMIC-IV as the EHR database, which
is not a universally accepted EHR schema, and the
databases are preprocessed for the QA task by eliminating duplicate values across different tables to
reduce ambiguity. Lastly, further experiments are
necessary for newly proposed LLMs, since most
methods, including text-to-SQL generation and abstention, depend heavily on the underlying LLMs.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Asma Ben Abacha from
Microsoft Health AI and the ClinicalNLP organizers for their feedback and support for the EHRSQL
2024 shared task. We also thank all the participating teams who contributed to the success of this
shared task by proposing their interesting methods and showing strong engagement. This work
was supported by the Institute for Information
& communications Technology Promotion(IITP)
grant (No.2019-0-00075) and the National Re-

search Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant (NRF2020H1D3A2A03100945) funded by the Korea
government (MSIT).

References
Massih-Reza Amini, Vasilii Feofanov, Loic Pauletto,
Emilie Devijver, and Yury Maximov. 2022. Selftraining: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.12040.
Shuaichen Chang and Eric Fosler-Lussier. 2023. How
to prompt llms for text-to-sql: A study in zeroshot, single-domain, and cross-domain settings. In
NeurIPS 2023 Second Table Representation Learning
Workshop.
Jiefeng Chen, Jinsung Yoon, Sayna Ebrahimi, Sercan
Arik, Tomas Pfister, and Somesh Jha. 2023. Adaptation with self-evaluation to improve selective prediction in llms. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, pages 5190вҖ“
5213.
Dawei Gao, Haibin Wang, Yaliang Li, Xiuyu Sun,
Yichen Qian, Bolin Ding, and Jingren Zhou. 2023.
Text-to-sql empowered by large language models: A benchmark evaluation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.15363.
Satya Gundabathula and Sriram Kolar. 2024. Promptmind team at ehrsql-2024: Improving reliability of
sql generation using ensemble llms. In Proceedings of the 6th Clinical Natural Language Processing Workshop, Mexico City, Mexico. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Mohammed Jabir, Kamal Kanakarajan, and Malaikannan Sankarasubbu. 2024. Saama technologies at
ehrsql 2024: Sql generation through classification answer selector by llm. In Proceedings of the 6th Clinical Natural Language Processing Workshop, Mexico
City, Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Yongrae Jo, Seongyun Lee, Minju Seo, Sung Ju Hwang,
and Moontae Lee. 2024. Lg ai research & kaist at
ehrsql 2024: Self-training large language models
with pseudo-labeled unanswerable questions for a
reliable text-to-sql system on ehrs. In Proceedings of
the 6th Clinical Natural Language Processing Workshop, Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Alistair Johnson, Lucas Bulgarelli, Tom Pollard,
Steven Horng, Leo Anthony Celi, and Roger Mark.
2020. Mimic-iv. PhysioNet. Available online at:
https://physionet. org/content/mimiciv/1.0/(accessed
August 23, 2021), pages 49вҖ“55.
Alistair EW Johnson, Tom J Pollard, Lu Shen, Li-wei H
Lehman, Mengling Feng, Mohammad Ghassemi,
Benjamin Moody, Peter Szolovits, Leo Anthony Celi,
and Roger G Mark. 2016. Mimic-iii, a freely accessible critical care database. Scientific data, 3(1):1вҖ“9.

Sourav Bhowmik Joy, Rohan Ahmed, Argha Pratim
Saha, Minhaj Ahmed, Utsho Das, and Partha Sarothi
Bhowmik. 2024. Project primus at ehrsql 2024: Textto-sql generation using large language model for ehr
analysis. In Proceedings of the 6th Clinical Natural Language Processing Workshop, Mexico City,
Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Chanhwi Kim, Hajung Kim, Hoonick Lee, Jiwoo Lee,
Kyochul Jang, Kyungjae Lee, Gangwoo Kim, and
Jaewoo Kang. 2024a. Ku-dmis: Generating sql query
via question templatization in ehr. In Proceedings of
the 6th Clinical Natural Language Processing Workshop, Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Sangryul Kim, Donghee Han, and Sehyun Kim. 2024b.
Probgate at ehrsql 2024: Enhancing sql query generation accuracy through probabilistic threshold filtering
and error handling. In Proceedings of the 6th Clinical Natural Language Processing Workshop, Mexico
City, Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Gyubok Lee, Woosog Chay, Seonhee Cho, and Edward
Choi. 2024. Trustsql: A reliability benchmark for
text-to-sql models with diverse unanswerable questions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.15879.
Gyubok Lee, Hyeonji Hwang, Seongsu Bae, Yeonsu
Kwon, Woncheol Shin, Seongjun Yang, Minjoon Seo,
Jong-Yeup Kim, and Edward Choi. 2022. Ehrsql: A
practical text-to-sql benchmark for electronic health
records. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 35:15589вҖ“15601.
Alexandra Mullins, Renee OвҖҷDonnell, Mariam Mousa,
David Rankin, Michael Ben-Meir, Christopher BoydSkinner, and Helen Skouteris. 2020. Health outcomes and healthcare efficiencies associated with
the use of electronic health records in hospital emergency departments: a systematic review. Journal of
Medical Systems, 44(12):200.
Tom J Pollard, Alistair EW Johnson, Jesse D Raffa,
Leo A Celi, Roger G Mark, and Omar Badawi. 2018.
The eicu collaborative research database, a freely
available multi-center database for critical care research. Scientific data, 5(1):1вҖ“13.
Mohammadreza Pourreza and Davood Rafiei. 2024.
Din-sql: Decomposed in-context learning of textto-sql with self-correction. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36.
Liudmila Prokhorenkova, Gleb Gusev, Aleksandr
Vorobev, Anna Veronika Dorogush, and Andrey
Gulin. 2018. Catboost: unbiased boosting with categorical features. Advances in neural information
processing systems, 31.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine
Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou,
Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. 2020. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
transformer. Journal of machine learning research,
21(140):1вҖ“67.

Preethi Raghavan, Jennifer J Liang, Diwakar Mahajan,
Rachita Chandra, and Peter Szolovits. 2021. emrKBQA: A clinical knowledge-base question answering
dataset. In Proceedings of the 20th Workshop on
Biomedical Language Processing, pages 64вҖ“73, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Baptiste Roziere, Jonas Gehring, Fabian Gloeckle, Sten
Sootla, Itai Gat, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Yossi Adi,
Jingyu Liu, Tal Remez, JГ©rГ©my Rapin, et al. 2023.
Code llama: Open foundation models for code. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2308.12950.
Torsten Scholak, Nathan Schucher, and Dzmitry Bahdanau. 2021. Picard: Parsing incrementally for
constrained auto-regressive decoding from language
models. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 9895вҖ“9901.
Oleg Somov, Elena Tutubalina, and Alexei Dontsov.
2024. Airi nlp team at ehrsql 2024: T5 and logistic regression to the rescue. In Proceedings of the
6th Clinical Natural Language Processing Workshop,
Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Jerrin John Thomas, Pruthwik Mishra, Dipti Sharma,
and Parameswari Krishnamurthy. 2024. Ltrc-iiith at
ehrsql 2024: Enhancing reliability of text-to-sql systems through abstention and confidence thresholding.
In Proceedings of the 6th Clinical Natural Language
Processing Workshop, Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Soumya Upadhyay and Han-fen Hu. 2022. A qualitative analysis of the impact of electronic health
records (ehr) on healthcare quality and safety: CliniciansвҖҷ lived experiences. Health Services Insights,
15:11786329211070722.
Aykut Uslu, JГјrgen Stausberg, et al. 2021. Value of
the electronic medical record for hospital care: update from the literature. Journal of medical Internet
research, 23(12):e26323.
Ping Wang, Tian Shi, and Chandan K Reddy. 2020.
Text-to-sql generation for question answering on electronic medical records. In Proceedings of The Web
Conference 2020, pages 350вҖ“361.
Spencer Whitehead, Suzanne Petryk, Vedaad Shakib,
Joseph Gonzalez, Trevor Darrell, Anna Rohrbach,
and Marcus Rohrbach. 2022. Reliable visual question answering: Abstain rather than answer incorrectly. In European Conference on Computer Vision,
pages 148вҖ“166. Springer.
Yongjin Yang, Sihyeon Kim, SangMook Kim, Gyubok
Lee, Se-Young Yun, and Edward Choi. 2024. Towards unbiased evaluation of detecting unanswerable
questions in EHRSQL. In ICLR 2024 Workshop on
Navigating and Addressing Data Problems for Foundation Models.

Weizhe Yuan, Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Kyunghyun Cho,
Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Jing Xu, and Jason Weston.
2024. Self-rewarding language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2401.10020.

A

Code Submission and Fact Sheet Template

Fact Sheet for EHRSQL-2024 Shared Task:
I. Team name
вҖў Username on Codalab:
вҖў Team leader affiliation:
вҖў Team leader email:
вҖў Name of other team members (and affiliation):
вҖў Team website URL (if any):
II. Contribution
вҖў Title of the contribution
вҖ“ Provide a brief summary of the method and contributions.
вҖў Representative image / workflow diagram of the method
вҖ“ An image (or several images) to support method description to better understand the
approach and model pipeline. You can refer to these images in the method description
part.
вҖў Detailed method description
вҖ“ Provide a technical and detailed description of the method and contributions. The
explanations must be self-contained and one must be able to reproduce the approach by
reading this section.
вҖў Shared task results
вҖ“ RS0 :
вҖ“ RS5 :
вҖ“ RS10 :
вҖ“ RSN :
вҖў Final Remarks
вҖ“ Please identify the pros and cons (if any) of the proposed approach.
III. Additional method details
вҖў Did you use any pre-trained model?
вҖў Did you use external data?
вҖў Did you perform any data augmentation?
вҖў At the test phase, did you use the provided validation set as part of your training set?
вҖў Did you use any regularization strategies/terms?

вҖў Did you use handcrafted features?
вҖў Did you use any domain adaptation strategy?
IV. Code Repository
вҖў Link to a code repository with complete and detailed instructions so that the results obtained
on Codabench can be reproduced.
вҖў If private repo, share the repo with glee4810

