arXiv:2301.07695v6 [cs.CL] 4 Mar 2026

EHRSQL: A Practical Text-to-SQL Benchmark for
Electronic Health Records
Gyubok Lee1 , Hyeonji Hwang1 , Seongsu Bae1 , Yeonsu Kwon2 ,
Woncheol Shin1 , Seongjun Yang1 , Minjoon Seo1 , Jongyeup Kim†, Edward Choi1
KAIST, Daejeon1 Seoul Women’s University, Seoul2
College of Medicine, Konyang University, Daejeon†
{gyubok.lee,localh,seongsu,swc1905,seongjunyang,
minjoon,edwardchoi}@kaist.ac.kr1
dustn1259@swu.ac.kr2 , jykim@kyuh.ac.kr†

Abstract
We present a new text-to-SQL dataset for electronic health records (EHRs). The
utterances were collected from 222 hospital staff members, including physicians,
nurses, and insurance review and health records teams. To construct the QA dataset
on structured EHR data, we conducted a poll at a university hospital and used
the responses to create seed questions. We then manually linked these questions
to two open-source EHR databases, MIMIC-III and eICU, and included various
time expressions and held-out unanswerable questions in the dataset, which were
also collected from the poll. Our dataset poses a unique set of challenges: the
model needs to 1) generate SQL queries that reflect a wide range of needs in the
hospital, including simple retrieval and complex operations such as calculating
survival rate, 2) understand various time expressions to answer time-sensitive
questions in healthcare, and 3) distinguish whether a given question is answerable
or unanswerable. We believe our dataset, EHRSQL, can serve as a practical
benchmark for developing and assessing QA models on structured EHR data and
take a step further towards bridging the gap between text-to-SQL research and its
real-life deployment in healthcare. EHRSQL is available at https://github.
com/glee4810/EHRSQL.

1

Introduction

Electronic health records (EHRs) are relational databases that store a patient’s entire medical history
in the hospital. From hospital admission to patient treatment and discharge, all medical events
that happened in the hospital are recorded and stored in the EHR. The records cover a wide range
of clinical knowledge, from individual-level information to group-level insight, in various forms,
including tables, text, and images [16, 17, 11, 15]. As a vast and comprehensive knowledge base,
hospital staff, including physicians, nurses, and administrators, constantly interact with EHRs to store
and retrieve patient information to make better clinical decisions [32, 3].
Meanwhile, most hospital staff interact with the EHR database using pre-defined rule conversion
systems. To look for information beyond the rules, one needs to undergo special training to modify
and extend the system [32]. As a result, it is a massive bottleneck for the users to fully utilize the
information stored in the EHR. An alternative way to tackle this problem is to build a system that
can automatically translate questions directly into the corresponding SQL queries. Then, the users
can simply type or verbally ask their questions to the system, and it will return the answers without
going through any complicated process. Such systems will unleash the potential of EHR data and
tremendously speed up any task involving data retrieval from the database.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

Existing datasets that tackle question answering (QA) over structured EHR data are MIMICSQL [32]
and emrKBQA [27]. MIMICSQL is the first dataset for healthcare QA on MIMIC-III [16], where the
questions are automatically generated with pre-defined templates. emrKBQA is another dataset on
MIMIC-III derived from emrQA [23], a clinical reading comprehension dataset. However, through a
poll at a university hospital, we discover that the existing datasets are far from fulfilling the actual
needs in the hospital workplace in several aspects.
We present EHRSQL1 , a new large-scale text-to-SQL dataset linked to two open-source EHR
databases—MIMIC-III [16] and eICU [25]. To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first
EHR QA dataset that reflects the diverse needs of hospital staff while introducing practical issues in
deploying healthcare QA systems. The unique challenges posed by our dataset are threefold:
• Wide range of questions: We conducted a poll at a university hospital to collect questions
frequently asked on structured EHR data. The total number of respondents was 222 people with
varying years of experience in their professions (see Figure 1). After filtering and templatizing
the responses, the resulting templates cover a wide range of questions, including retrieving
patient records (e.g., vital signs measured and hospital cost) and conducting complex group-level
operations (e.g., retrieving the top N medications prescribed after being diagnosed with a disease
and calculating the N-year survival rate). See Table 1 for more examples.
• Time-sensitive questions: Based on the poll, we learned that real-world questions in the hospital
workplace are rich in time expressions, as time is one of the most crucial aspects of healthcare.
To reflect this in the dataset, we systematically categorized time into multiple expression types
(e.g., absolute, relative, and mixed), units (e.g., hospital visit, month, and day), and interval
types (e.g., since, until, and in). Then, we combined the categorized time with the question
templates to simulate time-sensitive questions asked in the hospital. More details are discussed in
Section 3.1.2.
• Trustworthy QA systems: Developing trustworthy systems is crucial for the adoption of AI in
healthcare. Likewise, QA systems need to return only accurate answers and refuse to answer
questions beyond their capabilities. To test this, we include unanswerable questions in the dataset,
utilizing the remaining utterances from the poll result. These utterances are unanswerable due to
incompatibility with the database schema or requiring external domain knowledge.

2

Related Works

EHR QA Pampari et al. [23] proposed emrQA for question answering on clinical notes based on
physicians’ frequently asked questions. Later, Raghavan et al. [27] proposed emrKBQA2 , which
adapted emrQA to structured patient records in MIMIC-III. Due to the nature of the original dataset
targeting outpatients, the scope of the questions in emrKBQA is limited to mostly asking about
patients’ test results [27]. Recently, Wang et al. [32] proposed MIMICSQL, which first tackles EHR
QA with the text-to-SQL generation task. To construct the dataset, they automatically generated
questions based on pre-defined rules and filtered them through crowd-sourcing. However, MIMICSQL
contains a limited scope of questions and simple SQL queries restricted to five tables, which are far
from the actual use case in the hospital [24]. EHRSQL, on the other hand, originates from the actual
poll result and covers a variety of real-world questions (spanning 13.5 tables on average) frequently
asked on structured EHR data (see Table 1).
Semantic parsing datasets Semantic parsing has been one of the most active areas of research in
natural language processing over the past few decades [13, 37, 34, 9]. It involves converting natural
language utterances to logical form representations, which are often executable programs such as
Python scripts and SQL queries. WikiSQL [40] and Spider [35] are leading datasets that assess
semantic parsing models on unseen databases. WikiSQL provides a wide range of database domains
extracted from HTML tables in Wikipedia, but it only contains simple SQL queries and single tables.
Spider aims to tackle complex queries, including joining and set operations, on multiple tables in
multiple database domains. Recently, more realistic datasets have been proposed to bridge the gap
between academic and practical settings in semantic parsing. KaggleDBQA [19] utilizes real-world
databases from Kaggle and constructs domain-specific questions without relying on the database
1
2

The dataset is distributed under the CC BY 4.0 license.
emrKBQA is yet to be publicly released at the time of this work.

2

Table 1: Sample utterances in EHRSQL (SQL queries are labeled differently according to the
MIMIC-III and eICU schemas).
Type

Sample question
Tell me the birthdate of patient 92721?

Prescription

When was the first prescription time of patient 20000?

Nursing

What was the last arterial bp [systolic] for patient 23042?

Physician, Nursing,
Health records, Other

Vital sign
Question
diversity

Time-sensitive
question

Unanswerable
question

Department

Demographics

Nursing

Cost

What is the average total hospital cost that involves non-invasive mech vent?

Insurance review

Survival rate

What are the five diagnoses which have the lowest four year survival rate?

Nursing

Longitudinal
statistics

What are the five most commonly prescribed drugs for patients who have been
diagnosed with hypotension nos earlier since 2104 within 2 months?

Physician, Nursing

Absolute

Is the heart rate of patient 2518 measured at 2105-12-31 12:00:00 less than
the value measured at 2105-12-31 09:00:00?

Physician

Tell me the last specimen test given to patient 51177 in 10/2105?

Nursing

Relative

Tell me patient 6990’s daily average gastric meds intake on the last ICU visit.

-

Mixed

Tell me the medication that patient 3929 has been prescribed for the first time
in 05/this year.

Nursing

Requiring
external knowledge

What is the name of the medication which should not be administered during
the contrast arteriogram-leg treatment?

Nursing

Beyond DB schema

When is the next earliest hospital visit of patient 73652?

Nursing

schema. SEDE [12] deals with complex SQL queries that Stack Exchange users ask in real life. Our
motivation aligns with theirs in that additional challenges arise in real-world healthcare QA systems.
Unanswerable questions in QA In the early days of question answering, unanswerable questions
were generated via distant supervision [18, 4], rule-based editing [14], or adversarial creation by
crowd workers [28]. Yet, in semantic parsing, most works assume that all input questions are valid
and can be answered; however, this is not true in practice [38]. Retrieving answers to all the input
questions is not always desirable for the model to ensure system reliability. To address this, Zhang
et al. [38] utilized other text-to-SQL and chit-chat datasets to construct unanswerable questions and
posed the problem as a classification task to detect unanswerable questions. Our work, on the other
hand, addresses both system reliability and semantic parsing simultaneously and the unanswerable
questions are naturally collected through the poll. In task-oriented dialog systems, the same task has
been tackled in the name of Out-Of-Domain (OOD) detection, and several recent works approach this
problem without explicitly showing OOD samples to the model during training for practical reasons.
Following their setup, our unanswerable questions are only included in the validation and test sets.

3

Dataset Construction

Data collection The motivation behind our work is to construct a dataset that reflects the actual
needs of hospital staff and tackles several practical issues that can arise in real-world healthcare
QA systems (see Table 1). To this end, we collaborated with the Konyang University Hospital3 and
conducted a poll to collect real-world questions as if one is asking an AI speaker what they frequently
look for in structured information in the EHR. In addition, to clarify what machines can and cannot
answer, we provided typical negative examples of what should not be asked, such as requiring external
knowledge, ambiguous or qualitative statements, or asking for reasons behind clinical decisions. As a
result, we gathered a total of 1,742 utterances, and the number of valid respondents was 222 (see
Figure 1 for respondent demographics).
3.1

Question and SQL Generation

3.1.1

Question template

After the poll, we filtered out the utterances that did not meet the criteria, including ambiguous
statements, those that require external knowledge, or those that go beyond the database schema. We
3

https://www.kyuh.ac.kr/eng/

3

Question:

When was the last time that patient 1234 had a body temperature
measured?

SQL Query:

SELECT chartevents.charttime
FROM chartevents
WHERE chartevents.icustay_id IN (
SELECT icustays.icustay_id
FROM icustays
WHERE icustays.hadm_id IN (
SELECT admissions.hadm_id
FROM admissions
WHERE admissions.subject_id = 1234 ) )
AND chartevents.itemid IN (
SELECT d_items.itemid
FROM d_items
WHERE d_items.label = 'temperature c (calc)'
AND d_items.linksto = 'chartevents' )
ORDER BY chartevents.charttime DESC LIMIT 1

Schema: chartevents

row_id

transfers

row_id

icustay_id

admission

row_id

subject_id hadm_id

d_items

row_id

icustay_id

itemid

charttime

hadm_id

itemid

…

intime

outtime

…

admittime

dischtime

…

label

linksto

…

Figure 1: Demographics of the 222 respondents Figure 2: EHR schema is structured in a hierarchy,
by hospital departments and the years of experi- and real-world questions often require multi-step
ence.
reasoning over tables.
then categorized the utterances into three patient-based scopes: a single patient, a group of patients,
and no patient. For each scope, duplicate utterances, but differently phrased, were merged into a
single question template. We also manually added question templates that were simple variants of
existing templates. For example, we modified the type of medical events (e.g., lab test, prescription,
etc.) in question templates, such as from “Count the number of times that a patient had a lab test”
to “Count the number of times that a patient received a prescription.” To cover more questions
on longitudinal statistics, we linked two different medical events together whenever possible. For
example, the question “What are the top N prescriptions after a diagnosis,” which was originally
collected, is extended to “What are the top N lab tests after a diagnosis.” Finally, the filtered-out
utterances were also templatized and considered unanswerable. The unanswerable questions included
side effects, next check-up schedules, primary care doctor, patient’s personal information, whether a
patient has signed a consent form, diagnosis received in other departments, and more.
Table 2: Sample question templates. The full list is reported in Supplementary B.1.
Patient scope
None
Individual
Group

Unanswerable

Question template
What is the intake method of {drug_name}?
Has patient {patient_id} received any procedure [time_filter_global]?
Count the number of hospital visits of patient {patient_id} [time_filter_global].
What are the top [n_rank] frequent procedures that patients received [time_filter_within]
after having been diagnosed with {diagnosis_name} [time_filter_global]?
What is the effect of {drug_name}?

The resulting question templates are natural utterances with slots that are later filled with pre-defined
values or database records (see Table 2). Slots containing “time_filter” are processed in the time
template sampling stage, described in Section 3.1.2. We eliminate any ambiguity in the question
templates that could cause the model to infer table or column names incorrectly. For example, “When
did this patient get [slot] today?” is removed because it does not tell us whether we are interested in
drugs, lab tests, or something else unless the slot is filled. Such linguistic ambiguity is later introduced
in the paraphrase generation stage described in Section 3.3. As a result, we curated 230 question
templates (174 for answerable and 56 for unanswerable) based on the MIMIC-III and eICU schemas.
For answerable questions, their corresponding SQL queries were labeled for each database, which is
further discussed in Section 3.1.3.
3.1.2

Time template

Since the healthcare domain is inextricably linked to time, many utterances we collected were rich
in time expressions. To reflect this in the dataset, we developed three time filter types and assigned
different time factors (expression types, units, and interval types) to each filter type to compose
a single time template. First, we define a “global” time filter ([time_filter_global]) that
4

constrains the full range of time we are interested in. Second, within the global time filter, we can
also use a “within” time filter ([time_filter_within]) to indicate the time range between two
or more medical events. Third, we can point to an exact time ([time_filter_exact]), such as
“last” measurement or “at 2105-12-31 09:00:00” if we know the exact time or the order of an event.
Each time filter type has three factors and an extra option: 1) Expression type is whether the filter
is phrased in an absolute, relative, or mixed time expression (e.g., last year, in 2022, etc.); 2) Unit
is the granularity of time, such as a standardized unit (e.g., year, month, day, etc.) or an arbitrary
unit of events (e.g., hospital visit, ICU visit); 3) Interval type specifies the type of time interval
(e.g., since, until, in, etc.). Depending on the use case, Option allows to choose one exact event
(e.g., first, last) among the filtered events. Table 3 shows sample time templates and their natural
language (NL) time expressions. It is important to note that each time template has its corresponding
NL time expression (e.g., since {month}/{day}/{year}) and SQL time pattern (e.g., WHERE
strftime('%Y-%m-%d',[time_column]) >= '{year}-{month}-{day}'), while
the question templates are originally created in natural language. The NL time expressions are
combined with the question templates to form complete questions. The SQL time patterns are
combined with the labeled SQL queries to form complete SQL queries (see Section 3.1.4 for details).
The full list of time templates (NL and SQL pairs) is reported in Supplementary B.2.
Table 3: Sample time templates and their NL time expressions.
Time filter type

Expression type

Unit

Interval type

Option

Time template

NL time expression

absolute

day

since

-

abs-day-since

since {month}/{day}/{year}

relative

year

in

[time_filter_global]

last

rel-year-last

last year

this

rel-year-this

this year

-

hospital

in

-

within-hosp

within the same hospital visit

-

day

in

-

within-day

within the same day

relative

exact

at

-

exact-first

first

[time_filter_within]
[time_filter_exact]

3.1.3

SQL annotation

The SQL annotation process was conducted manually by four graduate students over the course of
five months, with repeated revisions. Since the questions were collected independently of the database
schema, SQL labeling required numerous assumptions (e.g., which medical event is mapped to which
column in the database, the choice of rank functions in SQL, the occasion of using DISTINCT,
etc.). To sync template and value sampling, the same slots introduced in Section 3.1.1 and 3.1.2
(e.g., {drug_name}, [n_rank], [time_filter_global]) were also used in SQL labeling
as placeholders. The SQL queries for question and time templates were labeled by one person,
followed by a reviewer for each database. Unlike most SQL datasets, the students were asked to
avoid using JOIN, which is a go-to operation when retrieving information across multiple tables. In
MIMIC-III and eICU, several tables contain more than 100 million rows (e.g., 330 million rows in
MIMIC-III chartevents) as the records are stored in a “log” based manner. In fact, it is extremely
inefficient to merge all the tables in such large databases without understanding what specific columns
are needed to answer a question. As a result, the students were asked to utilize the hierarchical
structure of the EHR schema, as illustrated in Figure 2, and labeled each query in a nested manner
whenever possible. SQL annotation details and the comparison between JOIN and nesting-based
queries are discussed in Supplementary C.
3.1.4

Template combination and data generation

Data generation starts by selecting a question template, followed by three sampling stages that add
semantic variety: operation value sampling, time template sampling, and condition value sampling
(See Figure 3). Stage 1 involves sampling operation values from pre-defined values that are independent of the database schema or records (e.g., maximum, five-year, two or more times, etc.). Then,
time templates are sampled in Stage 2 based on the time filter types that each question template
can have. Stage 2 in Figure 3 illustrates that the time templates ([time_filter_global]
and [time_filter_within]) have already been sampled and converted into NL time expressions. More details are discussed in Supplementary B.3. Finally, condition value sampling (e.g.,
{diagnosis_name}, {year}) occurs in Stage 3, and the slot filling process is complete. This
5

Question
Templatization

DB-independent
Sampling

Stage 0
Question template
What are the top [n_rank]
frequently prescribed drugs
that patients aged [age_group]
were prescribed
[time_filter_within] after having
been diagnosed with
{diagnosis_name}
[time_filter_global1]?

Stage 1

X

Operation value

DB-dependent
Sampling

Stage 2

X

Time template
What are the top three
frequently prescribed drugs
that patients aged 60 or
above were prescribed
within the same month
after having been diagnosed
with {diagnosis_name}
since {year} year ago?

What are the top three
frequently prescribed drugs
that patients aged 60 or
above were prescribed
[time_filter_within] after
having been diagnosed with
{diagnosis_name}
[time_filter_global1]?

Stage 3

X

Condition value
What are the top three
frequently prescribed drugs
that patients aged 60 or
above were prescribed
within the same month
after having been diagnosed
with postsurgical
hypothyroid
since 5 year ago?

Figure 3: Question generation process. The shaded region refers to the expansion of semantic
diversity in the template pool.
final stage is where the actual database records are sampled, and all generated SQL queries are
checked to have at least one valid answer. Once the query is successfully executed, the pair of SQL
and the corresponding question is added to the data pool, which is later used for data splitting.
3.2

Database Pre-processing

Cost table We modified the original MIMIC-III and eICU databases to include a cost table in
order to reflect hospital administration and insurance-related questions. When constructing the table,
we referred to the OMOP Common Data Model4 to create new column names, which include:
patient_id, hospital_admission_id, event_type (cost_domain_id), event_id
(cost_event_id), chargetime, and cost. For cost sampling, we take a two-step sampling
procedure to simulate cost values. First, we sampled discrete-valued mean costs for four different
medical event types (diagnosis, procedure, prescription, and lab events) from a Poisson distribution
with a mean of 10. Then, we sampled continuous-valued costs from Gaussian distributions with their
corresponding means.
Time shifting The time span of MIMIC-III is over a hundred years due to the de-identification
process (originally seven years), while eICU’s time span remains intact (two years). To simulate a
more realistic time span asked in the hospital and match the time across the databases, we shifted
the admission time of every patient’s records ranging from 2100 to 2105. In addition, to incorporate
the concept of current and the use of relative time expressions, we set the current time to be
“2105-12-31 23:59:00” and removed any record past the current time. In this way, patients
with missing hospital discharge time are considered current patients. The poll result revealed that
many time expressions used in the hospital are relative time expressions (e.g., today, yesterday, last
month, etc.), and therefore this process was necessary to reflect time-sensitive questions. More details
are reported in Supplementary D.2.
De-identification MIMIC-III and eICU databases are de-identified datasets, and a user needs
to request credentialed access to PhysioNet5 to obtain them. Both datasets, however, do contain
real patient records, and the questions derived from them could potentially reveal patient-specific
information. For example, the question “What medication was given to patient ID 1234 after being
diagnosed with diabetes?” implies that this patient was diagnosed with diabetes. Combined with
some unforeseen external knowledge, this might lead to recovering the patient’s identity. To add
another layer of de-identification, we randomly shuffled values across all patients in the database
before sampling condition values. In this way, the semantic structure of the question remains the
same, but sampled condition values are untraceable. More details of the de-identification process are
reported in Supplementary D.3.
4
5

http://ohdsi.github.io/CommonDataModel/cdm54.html
https://physionet.org/

6

Table 4: The comparison between EHRSQL and other text-to-SQL datasets. # Nesting/Q is the
average number of nesting levels per query. % Time Used/Q is the percentage of at least one time
column used in queries. ?Schema is whether the question authors are unaware of the database
schema when they first come up with their question. UnANS indicates whether the dataset contains
unanswerable questions.
Dataset

# Example

# DB

# Table/DB

# Row/Table

# Table/Q

# Nesting/Q

% Time Used/Q

?Schema

UnANS

Spider†
KaggleDBQA
SEDE

8K
0.3K
12K

160
8
1

5.1
2.3
29

2K
280K
-

1.6
1.2
1.8

1.2
1.0
1.3

12.7%
17.3%
20.2%

✗
✗
✗

✗
✗
✗

MIMICSQL
emrKBQA‡

10K
940K

1
1

5
9

7K
-

1.8
-

1.0
-

26.6%
-

✗
✓

✗
✗

2.7

93.2%

✓

✓

EHRSQL
24K
2
13.5
108K
2.4
†Train and validation sets are counted. ‡The dataset is yet to be publicly released.

3.3

Paraphrase Generation

To add linguistic variety to the questions, we generated template paraphrases from the question
templates with manual paraphrasing and the help of machine learning models. Before paraphrasing,
we ensure that the templates do not contain any domain-specific expressions, making the paraphrasing
process depart from the healthcare domain to leverage general-domain tools. The overall procedure
is as follows:
1. Human paraphrasing is first conducted to add more high-quality templates, averaging 21 paraphrases per question template.
2. Based on the human paraphrases, more paraphrases are generated using machine learning models,
such as T5 paraphrasers [6, 5, 1] and multilingual translation models for back-translation [8, 31].
3. The paraphrases that are too different from the original meaning are filtered using a duplicate
question detection model, specifically RoBERTa-large [20] trained on the Quora duplicate
question detection dataset.
4. The paraphrases are ranked by the perplexity score from GPT-Neo 1.3B [10] per question
template and disregarded if they are too similar to the other paraphrases with lower perplexity.
The Levenshtein distance is used to detect lexical similarity.
5. The final paraphrases are reviewed by crowd workers to rate the quality of the paraphrases. In
our case, we collaborated with a crowd-sourcing company named Selectstar6 . Three groups of
annotators were assigned to this task and marked a pass or fail for each paraphrase sample. The
samples with unanimous pass marks were considered the final machine-paraphrased templates,
leaving 47 paraphrases per template on average.
During the paraphrasing process, slots are replaced with generic values (e.g., {patient_id} →
the patient) and returned to the original slots after the process is complete. Later, those slots are filled
with the actual condition values in the value sampling process to construct the final question-to-SQL
pairs. The overview of the paraphrase pipeline is illustrated in Supplementary E.
3.4

EHRSQL and Other Datasets

Table 4 summarizes the statistics of EHRSQL and other text-to-SQL datasets in the literature.
Compared to general domain datasets (first three rows), EHRSQL has a large number of textto-SQL pairs (# Example), tables per database (# Table/DB), and rows per table (# Row/Table).
KaggleDBQA [19] and SEDE [12] are designed to bridge the gap between academic datasets and
practical usability by using real databases and naturally-occurring utterances. However, we have
gone one step further where the question authors (the poll respondents) were not presented with the
database schema (?Schema), which adds more reality to the dataset [12]. Finally, EHRSQL contains
unanswerable questions (UnANS) that were collected together from the poll, which may play a critical
role in assessing the reliability of the QA model. To the best of our knowledge, EHRSQL is the first
attempt to collect and combine answerable and unanswerable questions in the context of text-to-SQL.
From a healthcare perspective, EHRSQL covers a variety of questions frequently asked in the hospital.
The scope of these questions ranges from non-patient information (e.g., the cost of a procedure) to
6

https://selectstar.ai/en

7

Figure 4: Overview of trustworthy semantic parsing.

individual-level information (e.g., retrieving patient demographics and the lab values) and group-level
information (e.g., counting the number of patients in the hospital and the top N frequently prescribed
drugs of patients over 60s), further combined with various time expressions (% Time Used/Q). The
SQL queries are linked to two EHR databases: MIMIC-III and eICU, and this is the first attempt to
label SQL queries on eICU, allowing questions about multi-center critical care to be answered.

4

Benchmarks

4.1

Task

In this section, we define a new text-to-SQL task that assesses models under more realistic healthcare
QA settings than prior works—namely, trustworthy semantic parsing. As illustrated in Figure 4, the
trustworthy model needs to 1) generate SQL queries that reflect a wide range of needs in the hospital
workplace, 2) understand various time expressions to answer time-sensitive questions in healthcare,
and 3) have the capacity to distinguish whether a given question is answerable or unanswerable based
on the prediction confidence. Among various ways to calculate the confidence score, we argue that
a desirable way to calculate it is not based on the data the model is trained on, but on the model
prediction itself. As illustrated in Figure 4, once a confidence score exceeds some threshold of choice
(assuming that a greater score means less confidence), the generated SQL should not be sent to the
database.
To make the task feasible, we keep the condition values (e.g., prescription name) the same in this work,
except for genders and vital signs, as this is another major challenge in semantic parsing [30, 29].
When splitting the dataset into train, validation, and test sets, we ensure that all the question templates
are present in each split. To create a more realistic QA setting, we include unanswerable questions
only in the validation and test sets (consisting of 33% of each split), following the OOD detection
setting [22, 39]. Among 24,411 question pairs in the dataset, the train, valid, and test splits contain
9.3K, 1.1K, and 1.8K pairs, respectively, for each database. We release the train and valid splits,
totaling 21K samples, and the other 3K samples are saved for a hidden test set. Details of data
splitting are reported in Supplementary F.
4.2

Evaluation

The goal of the trustworthy semantic parsing task is to correctly return the answers to answerable
questions while disregarding unanswerable questions. This process can be evaluated in two aspects.
The model first needs to have a strategy that distinguishes whether a given question is answerable or
unanswerable. Given that the goal is to correctly recognize as many answerable questions as possible,
the model’s performance can be measured in precision and recall. In this case, the precision (Pans )
calculates the number of correctly recognized answerable questions among all questions predicted
to be answerable, while recall (Rans ) calculates the number of correctly recognized answerable
questions among all answerable questions. We use F1ans to combine these two scores.
8

Table 5: Performance on MIMIC-III (Left) and eICU (Right).
Model

Valid
F1ans

Test
F1exe

F1ans

Pexe

Rexe

Model

Pexe

Rexe

F1exe

95.4
95.3

76.6
76.6

T5
T5 + Schema

Valid
F1ans

Test

Pexe

Rexe

F1exe

F1ans

Pexe

Rexe

F1exe

80.7
80.7

65.2
64.4

Threshold: None
96.4
77.8
80.4
64.0
95.2
76.8
80.4
64.1

95.2
95.4

76.5
76.7

T5
T5 + Schema

80.8
80.8

65.2
65.3

Threshold: None
96.3
77.8
80.3
64.0
96.4
77.9
80.3
64.0

T5
T5 + Schema

89.2
87.9

80.2
77.3

Threshold: Clustering-based
95.5
87.2
86.5
75.0
96.2
85.7
84.8
72.3

94.8
94.9

83.8
82.1

T5
T5 + Schema

88.4
86.6

78.4
73.8

Threshold: Clustering-based
95.5
86.1
86.1
73.2
95.1
83.1
85.1
71.4

94.5
95.4

82.5
81.7

T5
T5 + Schema

94.8
93.5

94.3
93.0

Threshold: Percentile-based
93.3
93.8
91.4
88.8
92.0
92.5
90.6
88.4

91.1
89.7

89.9
89.1

T5
T5 + Schema

93.0
94.2

92.5
92.5

Threshold: Percentile-based
91.7
92.1
90.8
87.5
91.7
92.1
90.9
84.8

91.6
93.5

89.5
88.9

Next, we must evaluate how well the model generates correct SQL queries, given that some questions
are considered answerable and ready to predict. The word predict here means the actions of generating
a query and sending it to the database, where extra care is needed because the answer from the database
may be directly used for clinical decision-making. Combining the concept of F1ans and execution
accuracy in semantic parsing, F1exe counts only when the returned answer is correct. In other words,
F1exe is a combined score of Pexe and Rexe , where Pexe is the ratio of the number of correctly
answered questions to all questions predicted to be answerable and Rexe is the ratio of the number
of correctly answered questions to all answerable questions. As a result, the denominators of the
precisions and recalls are the same, but the numerators are more strictly counted in metrics with exe.
This gap between ans and exe reveals the model’s inability to generate correct SQL queries, given
that the questions are both recognized as answerable and indeed answerable.
4.3

Model Development

Most state-of-the-art (SOTA) semantic parsing models utilize grammar-based decoders and are only
compatible with the grammars (or their subsets) defined in the Spider dataset. As the queries in
EHRSQL are created in response to actual needs, most of them are incompatible with the Spider
parser mainly due to time-related operators like strftime, datetime and NULL. Therefore,
we chose general-purpose sequence-to-sequence models, T5-base [26] and T5-base with schema
serialization [30, 12], as baseline models for our task. This choice aligns with a recent finding
that transfer learning from pre-trained language models surpasses healthcare-specific text-to-SQL
models [2]. Training details are reported in Supplementary G.
To give a model the ability to refuse to answer questions, we adopt a simple uncertainty estimation
method inspired by [21, 33]. If the maximum entropy during the decoding process exceeds a predefined threshold, we consider this a refusal. The threshold values are determined by two heuristic
approaches, and they are compared with the result obtained without refusal.
1. Clustering-based: Run K-means clustering with k = 2 on all maximum entropy values of
validation samples, assuming that high-entropy samples are from unanswerable questions. The
decision boundary between the two clusters is then used as the threshold.
2. Percentile-based: Set the threshold to the 67th percentile of the maximum entropy values of
the validation samples, based on the fact that 33% of the questions in the validation set are
unanswerable.
To illustrate the domain gap between general-domain and healthcare datasets, we create a subset
of EHRSQL that could be parsed with the Spider parser. Then, we compare how well the SOTA
cross-domain semantic parsing models generalize to healthcare text-to-SQL datasets. We choose
MIMICSQL, which contains simple SQL queries that can all be parsed with the Spider grammar, and
EHRSQL for the healthcare datasets. Among many SOTA models in the Spider leaderboard, we use
Generation-Augmented Pre-training (GAP) [29] to test its zero-shot domain transfer performance.
4.4

Results and Findings

The baseline results are reported in Table 5. Among the three different threshold approaches, the
percentile-based threshold performs best on both the validation and test sets. This result is an expected
outcome because the ratios of the answerable and unanswerable questions in the validation and test
sets are kept the same in our setting. As for the clustering-based method, an additional training or
9

Table 6: Performance of zero-shot cross-domain transfer with GAP in execution accuracy. Easy,
medium, hard, and extra refer to Spider’s SQL hardness criteria. The numbers in parenthesis indicate
the number of correct cases divided by the number of answerable queries. All experiments are done
on answerable questions in the validation set.
Dataset

Easy

Medium

Hard

Extra

Skipped

All \ Skipped

MIMICSQL[32]

46.7 (79/169)

10.5 (85/809)

0.0 (0/22)

-

-

16.4 (164/1000)

EHRSQL
MIMIC-III only
eICU only

23.8 (5/21)
16.7 (2/12)
3.3 (3/9)

-

0.0 (0/23)
0.0 (0/15)
0.0 (0/8)

0.0 (0/63)
0.0 (0/30)
0.0 (0/33)

(0/1408)
(0/703)
(0/705)

4.7 (5/107)
3.5 (2/57)
6.0 (3/50)

clustering technique is needed for the models to better discriminate the entropy values. The naive
entropy values from the current models are not linearly separable across predictions (see Figure 7 in
Supplementary H.4 for maximum entropy distributions). T5+Schema shows comparable performance
to T5 in both databases. This result agrees with the recent finding in [12] that models trained in a
single database setting do not effectively leverage schema information. Additional qualitative results
are provided in Supplementary H, including SQL generation results by question complexity, time
expressions, falsely executed results, and refused results.
Table 6 shows the performance of zero-shot cross-domain transfer with the GAP model. Unlike
the queries in MIMICSQL, which are all parsable with the Spider grammar, EHRSQL has much
more complex SQL operators and structures, with only about 7% (107/1,515) of the answerable
questions in the validation set being parsable. As for model performance, GAP achieves 16.4% in the
full MIMICSQL validation set and 4.7% in the subset of the validation set in EHRSQL. This result
motivates again the need for a new practical text-to-SQL dataset in healthcare and QA models that
can handle multiple real-world challenges in the hospital.

5

Conclusion and Future Direction

In this paper, we present EHRSQL, a new practical text-to-SQL dataset for question answering over
structured information in EHRs. Through a poll conducted at a university hospital, we collected
questions that are frequently asked on structured EHR data across various professions in the hospital.
The questions reflect the actual needs in the hospital and different time expressions used in daily
work, which are particularly crucial in healthcare. Additionally, we also collected unanswerable
questions, which were the questions submitted by the respondents but turned out to be beyond the
EHR schema or ambiguous. Finally, we manually labeled SQL queries for two open-source EHR
databases—MIMIC-III and eICU—and cast these challenges as one task—trustworthy semantic
parsing—where QA models should only answer the question when their predictions are confident but
not otherwise.
Though we have carefully designed the dataset, there are several limitations. First, despite more than
two hundred people participating in the poll, the source of the questions is from one Korean university
hospital, which may not reflect every unique situation in different hospitals worldwide. Secondly, the
question templates are paraphrased using general-domain paraphrasers; therefore, paraphrases with
the heavy use of medical jargon could make them more realistic. Finally, SQL labels for two EHR
databases might not be a sufficient number of databases to train and test a model for unseen EHR
databases.
We expect numerous research directions with our dataset. The seed questions can be a valuable
resource for expanding the scope of table-based healthcare QA tasks, such as creating interactive
QA [36, 7] or developing it into multimodal QA datasets on EHRs. With the idea of trustworthy
semantic parsing, a new class of end-to-end uncertainty-aware semantic parsing models can be
proposed. As existing text-to-SQL models assume all inputs are answerable, this can be a unique
venue for semantic parsing to bridge the gap between research and industrial needs.

10

Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
We would like to thank five anonymous reviewers for their time and insightful comments. We also
thank Woochan Hwang for assisting us in clarifying our questions during the data labeling process.
This work was supported by Institute of Information & communications Technology Planning
& Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the Korea government(MSIT) (No.2019-0-00075, Artificial
Intelligence Graduate School Program(KAIST)), National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF)
grant (NRF-2020H1D3A2A03100945) and Data Voucher grant (2021-DV-I-P-00114), funded by the
Korea government (MSIT).

References
[1] Sai Vamsi Alisetti. Paraphrase generator with t5, 2020. URL https://github.com/Vamsi995/
Paraphrase-Generator.
[2] Seongsu Bae, Daeyoung Kim, Jiho Kim, and Edward Choi. Question answering for complex electronic
health records database using unified encoder-decoder architecture. In Proceedings of Machine Learning
for Health, volume 158 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 13–25. PMLR, 04 Dec 2021.
URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v158/bae21a.html.
[3] Jayetri Bardhan, Anthony Colas, Kirk Roberts, and Daisy Zhe Wang. Drugehrqa: A question answering
dataset on structured and unstructured electronic health records for medicine related queries. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2205.01290, 2022.
[4] Christopher Clark and Matt Gardner. Simple and effective multi-paragraph reading comprehension. In
Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers), pages 845–855, Melbourne, Australia, July 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
10.18653/v1/P18-1078. URL https://aclanthology.org/P18-1078.
[5] Prithiviraj Damodaran. Parrot: Paraphrase generation for nlu, 2021. URL https://github.com/
PrithivirajDamodaran/Parrot_Paraphraser.
[6] Prithiviraj Damodaran.
Styleformer,
PrithivirajDamodaran/Styleformer.

2021.

URL

https://github.com/

[7] Ahmed Elgohary, Saghar Hosseini, and Ahmed Hassan Awadallah. Speak to your parser: Interactive
text-to-SQL with natural language feedback. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 2065–2077, Online, July 2020. Association for Computational
Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.187. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.
acl-main.187.
[8] Angela Fan, Shruti Bhosale, Holger Schwenk, Zhiyi Ma, Ahmed El-Kishky, Siddharth Goyal, Mandeep
Baines, Onur Celebi, Guillaume Wenzek, Vishrav Chaudhary, et al. Beyond english-centric multilingual
machine translation. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(107):1–48, 2021.
[9] Catherine Finegan-Dollak, Jonathan K Kummerfeld, Li Zhang, Karthik Ramanathan, Sesh Sadasivam, Rui Zhang, and Dragomir Radev. Improving text-to-sql evaluation methodology. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1806.09029, 2018.
[10] Leo Gao, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Laurence Golding, Travis Hoppe, Charles Foster, Jason Phang,
Horace He, Anish Thite, Noa Nabeshima, et al. The pile: An 800gb dataset of diverse text for language
modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.00027, 2020.
[11] Ary L Goldberger, Luis AN Amaral, Leon Glass, Jeffrey M Hausdorff, Plamen Ch Ivanov, Roger G Mark,
Joseph E Mietus, George B Moody, Chung-Kang Peng, and H Eugene Stanley. Physiobank, physiotoolkit,
and physionet: components of a new research resource for complex physiologic signals. circulation, 101
(23):e215–e220, 2000.
[12] Moshe Hazoom, Vibhor Malik, and Ben Bogin. Text-to-sql in the wild: A naturally-occurring dataset
based on stack exchange data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.05006, 2021.
[13] Charles T. Hemphill, John J. Godfrey, and George R. Doddington. The ATIS spoken language systems pilot
corpus. In Speech and Natural Language: Proceedings of a Workshop Held at Hidden Valley, Pennsylvania,
June 24-27,1990, 1990. URL https://aclanthology.org/H90-1021.

11

[14] Robin Jia and Percy Liang. Adversarial examples for evaluating reading comprehension systems. In
Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
2021–2031, Copenhagen, Denmark, September 2017. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
10.18653/v1/D17-1215. URL https://aclanthology.org/D17-1215.
[15] Alistair Johnson, Lucas Bulgarelli, Tom Pollard, Steven Horng, Leo Anthony Celi, and Roger Mark.
Mimic-iv (version 1.0). PhysioNet, 2021. doi: https://doi.org/10.13026/s6n6-xd98.
[16] Alistair EW Johnson, Tom J Pollard, Lu Shen, H Lehman Li-Wei, Mengling Feng, Mohammad Ghassemi,
Benjamin Moody, Peter Szolovits, Leo Anthony Celi, and Roger G Mark. Mimic-iii, a freely accessible
critical care database. Scientific data, 3(1):1–9, 2016.
[17] Alistair EW Johnson, Tom J Pollard, Seth J Berkowitz, Nathaniel R Greenbaum, Matthew P Lungren,
Chih-ying Deng, Roger G Mark, and Steven Horng. Mimic-cxr, a de-identified publicly available database
of chest radiographs with free-text reports. Scientific data, 6(1):1–8, 2019.
[18] Mandar Joshi, Eunsol Choi, Daniel Weld, and Luke Zettlemoyer. TriviaQA: A large scale distantly
supervised challenge dataset for reading comprehension. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1601–1611, Vancouver,
Canada, July 2017. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P17-1147. URL
https://aclanthology.org/P17-1147.
[19] Chia-Hsuan Lee, Oleksandr Polozov, and Matthew Richardson. Kaggledbqa: Realistic evaluation of
text-to-sql parsers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.11455, 2021.
[20] Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining approach. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1907.11692, 2019.
[21] Andrey Malinin and Mark Gales. Uncertainty estimation in autoregressive structured prediction. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2002.07650, 2020.
[22] Petr Marek, Vishal Ishwar Naik, Vincent Auvray, and Anuj Goyal. Oodgan: Generative adversarial network
for out-of-domain data generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.02484, 2021.
[23] Anusri Pampari, Preethi Raghavan, Jennifer Liang, and Jian Peng. emrqa: A large corpus for question
answering on electronic medical records. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, pages 2357–2368, 2018.
[24] Junwoo Park, Youngwoo Cho, Haneol Lee, Jaegul Choo, and Edward Choi. Knowledge graph-based
question answering with electronic health records. In Machine Learning for Healthcare Conference, pages
36–53. PMLR, 2021.
[25] Tom J Pollard, Alistair EW Johnson, Jesse D Raffa, Leo A Celi, Roger G Mark, and Omar Badawi. The
eicu collaborative research database, a freely available multi-center database for critical care research.
Scientific data, 5(1):1–13, 2018.
[26] Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou,
Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.10683, 2019.
[27] Preethi Raghavan, Jennifer J Liang, Diwakar Mahajan, Rachita Chandra, and Peter Szolovits. emrkbqa: A
clinical knowledge-base question answering dataset. In Proceedings of the 20th Workshop on Biomedical
Language Processing, pages 64–73, 2021.
[28] Pranav Rajpurkar, Robin Jia, and Percy Liang. Know what you don’t know: Unanswerable questions for
squad. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.03822, 2018.
[29] Peng Shi, Patrick Ng, Zhiguo Wang, Henghui Zhu, Alexander Hanbo Li, Jun Wang, Cicero Nogueira
dos Santos, and Bing Xiang. Learning contextual representations for semantic parsing with generationaugmented pre-training. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35,
pages 13806–13814, 2021.
[30] Alane Suhr, Ming-Wei Chang, Peter Shaw, and Kenton Lee. Exploring unexplored generalization challenges
for cross-database semantic parsing. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 8372–8388, 2020.

12

[31] Yuqing Tang, Chau Tran, Xian Li, Peng-Jen Chen, Naman Goyal, Vishrav Chaudhary, Jiatao Gu, and
Angela Fan. Multilingual translation with extensible multilingual pretraining and finetuning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2008.00401, 2020.
[32] Ping Wang, Tian Shi, and Chandan K Reddy. Text-to-sql generation for question answering on electronic
medical records. In Proceedings of The Web Conference 2020, pages 350–361, 2020.
[33] Yijun Xiao and William Yang Wang. On hallucination and predictive uncertainty in conditional language
generation. In Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Main Volume, pages 2734–2744, 2021.
[34] Navid Yaghmazadeh, Yuepeng Wang, Isil Dillig, and Thomas Dillig. Sqlizer: query synthesis from natural
language. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages, 1(OOPSLA):1–26, 2017.
[35] Tao Yu, Rui Zhang, Kai Yang, Michihiro Yasunaga, Dongxu Wang, Zifan Li, James Ma, Irene Li, Qingning
Yao, Shanelle Roman, et al. Spider: A large-scale human-labeled dataset for complex and cross-domain
semantic parsing and text-to-sql task. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, pages 3911–3921, 2018.
[36] Tao Yu, Rui Zhang, Michihiro Yasunaga, Yi Chern Tan, Xi Victoria Lin, Suyi Li, Heyang Er, Irene Li,
Bo Pang, Tao Chen, et al. Sparc: Cross-domain semantic parsing in context. In Proceedings of the 57th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 4511–4523, 2019.
[37] John M Zelle and Raymond J Mooney. Learning to parse database queries using inductive logic programming. In Proceedings of the national conference on artificial intelligence, pages 1050–1055, 1996.
[38] Yusen Zhang, Xiangyu Dong, Shuaichen Chang, Tao Yu, Peng Shi, and Rui Zhang. Did you ask a good
question? a cross-domain question intention classification benchmark for text-to-sql. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.12634, 2020.
[39] Yinhe Zheng, Guanyi Chen, and Minlie Huang. Out-of-domain detection for natural language understanding
in dialog systems. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, 28:1198–1209,
2020.
[40] Victor Zhong, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. Seq2sql: Generating structured queries from natural
language using reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.00103, 2017.

13

Supplementary Material
A

Datasheet for Datasets

The following section is answers to questions listed in datasheets for datasets.
A.1

Motivation
• For what purpose was the dataset created?
EHRSQL is created to serve as a benchmark for trustworthy question answering systems on
structured data in electronic health records (EHRs).
• Who created the dataset (e.g., which team, research group) and on behalf of which entity
(e.g., company, institution, organization)?
The authors of this paper.
• Who funded the creation of the dataset? If there is an associated grant, please provide the
name of the grantor and the grant name and number.
This work was supported by Institute of Information & Communications Technology
Planning & Evaluation (IITP) grant (No.2019-0-00075, Artificial Intelligence Graduate
School Program(KAIST)), National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant (NRF2020H1D3A2A03100945) and Data Voucher grant (2021-DV-I-P-00114), funded by the
Korea government (MSIT).

A.2

Composition
• What do the instances that comprise the dataset represent (e.g., documents, photos, people,
countries)?
EHRSQL contains natural questions and their corresponding SQL queries (text).
• How many instances are there in total (of each type, if appropriate)?
There are about 24.4K instances (22.5K answerable; 1.9K unanswerable).
• Does the dataset contain all possible instances or is it a sample (not necessarily random) of
instances from a larger set?
We conducted a poll at a university hospital and collected a wide range of questions frequently asked on the structured EHR data. To reflect as many questions as possible, we
templatized them and ensured that the final dataset contained all the question templates we
created.
• What data does each instance consist of?
The dataset contains question-SQL pairs if the question is answerable. Unanswerable
questions do not have SQL labels.
• Is there a label or target associated with each instance?
Labels are SQL queries.
• Is any information missing from individual instances? If so, please provide a description,
explaining why this information is missing (e.g., because it was unavailable). This does not
include intentionally removed information, but might include, e.g., redacted text.
N/A.
• Are relationships between individual instances made explicit (e.g., users’ movie ratings,
social network links)?
N/A.
• Are there recommended data splits (e.g., training, development/validation, testing)?
See Section F.
• Are there any errors, sources of noise, or redundancies in the dataset?
Question templates are created to have slots that are later filled with pre-defined values
and records from the database. As a result, final questions can sound unnatural or be
grammatically incorrect depending on the sampled values (e.g., verb tense, articles, etc.).
• Is the dataset self-contained, or does it link to or otherwise rely on external resources (e.g.,
websites, tweets, other datasets)?
14

The labeled SQL queries rely on two open source databases: MIMIC-III (version 1.4)7 and
eICU (version 2.0)8 , which are accessible on PhysioNet9 .
• Does the dataset contain data that might be considered confidential (e.g., data that is protected
by legal privilege or by doctor– patient confidentiality, data that includes the content of
individuals’ non-public communications)?
N/A.
• Does the dataset contain data that, if viewed directly, might be offensive, insulting, threatening, or might otherwise cause anxiety?
N/A.
• Does the dataset relate to people?
Yes.
• Does the dataset identify any subpopulations (e.g., by age, gender)?
EHRSQL is based on patients in MIMIC-III and eICU. MIMIC-III includes over forty
thousand patients who stayed in critical care units of the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center between 2001 and 2012. eICU contains patients who were discharged between 2014
and 2015 in multiple critical care units in the United States.
• Is it possible to identify individuals (i.e., one or more natural persons), either directly or
indirectly (i.e., in combination with other data) from the dataset?
Even though MIMIC-III and eICU are already de-identified datasets, we further corrupted
patient-specific information to avoid any chance of recovering a patient’s identity. See
Section D.3 for details.
• Does the dataset contain data that might be considered sensitive in any way (e.g., data that
reveals race or ethnic origins, sexual orientations, religious beliefs, political opinions or
union memberships, or locations; financial or health data; biometric or genetic data; forms
of government identification, such as social security numbers; criminal history)?
The dataset is already de-identified.
A.3

Collection Process
• How was the data associated with each instance acquired?
We collaborated with the Konyang University Hospital10 and conducted a poll to collect
real-world questions that are frequently asked on the structured EHR data.
• What mechanisms or procedures were used to collect the data (e.g., hardware apparatuses or
sensors, manual human curation, software programs, software APIs)?
We used the website SurveyMonkey11 to create a poll and collect the responses. After the
poll, we used Excel, Google Sheets, and Python to process and label the collected data.
• If the dataset is a sample from a larger set, what was the sampling strategy (e.g., deterministic,
probabilistic with specific sampling probabilities)?
When it involves sampling (e.g., data splitting and patient de-identification), we sampled
with a fixed random seed.
• Who was involved in the data collection process (e.g., students, crowdworkers, contractors)
and how were they compensated (e.g., how much were crowdworkers paid)?
There were three parts that required human involvement in the data collection process: poll
for the question collection, SQL labeling, and quality checking for machine-paraphrased
text. For the poll, we provided a $10 worth of coffee gift card to all poll respondents. For
SQL labeling, the authors in the paper manually labeled SQL queries based on the database
schemas. We did not hire any crowd worker for this task because the databases contain
patient-specific information, and the SQL labeling process required numerous assumptions
(e.g., choice of SQL operations, schema linking, etc.). Lastly, we hired crowd workers to
check the quality of machine paraphrased text, who were paid approximately $18 per hour.

7

https://physionet.org/content/mimiciii/1.4/
https://physionet.org/content/eicu-crd/2.0/
9
https://physionet.org/
10
https://www.kyuh.ac.kr/eng/
11
www.surveymonkey.com
8

15

• Over what timeframe was the data collected?
The poll was conducted in February of 2021, but the results do not depend much on the date
of data collection.
• Were any ethical review processes conducted (e.g., by an institutional review board)?
N/A.
• Does the dataset relate to people?
Yes.
• Did you collect the data from the individuals in question directly, or obtain it via third parties
or other sources (e.g., websites)?
We directly collected the data through a poll.
• Were the individuals in question notified about the data collection?
Yes. The poll respondents were notified about the use of data. The actual website we used
for the poll is here12 . The poll was conducted in Korean.
• Did the individuals in question consent to the collection and use of their data?
The purpose of the poll was announced to hospital staff, and only the staff who were
interested in the poll participated.
• If consent was obtained, were the consenting individuals provided with a mechanism to
revoke their consent in the future or for certain uses?
N/A.
• Has an analysis of the potential impact of the dataset and its use on data subjects (e.g., a
data protection impact analysis) been conducted?
The dataset does not have individual-specific information.
A.4

Preprocessing/cleaning/labeling
• Was any preprocessing/cleaning/labeling of the data done (e.g., discretization or bucketing,
tokenization, part-of-speech tagging, SIFT feature extraction, removal of instances, processing of missing values)?
N/A.
• Was the “raw” data saved in addition to the preprocessed/cleaned/labeled data (e.g., to
support unanticipated future uses)?
N/A.
• Is the software that was used to preprocess/clean/label the data available?
Preprocessing, cleaning, and labeling are done via Excel, Google Sheets, and Python.

A.5

Uses
• Has the dataset been used for any tasks already?
No.
• Is there a repository that links to any or all papers or systems that use the dataset?
No.
• What (other) tasks could the dataset be used for?
In addition to solving trustworthy semantic parsing, the seed questions themselves can be a
good starting point for any healthcare table-based question answering tasks.
• Is there anything about the composition of the dataset or the way it was collected and
preprocessed/cleaned/labeled that might impact future uses?
N/A.
• Are there tasks for which the dataset should not be used?
N/A.

12

https://www.surveymonkey.com/r/Preview/?sm=hv3JkWYLdzXq2G8m_2Bh8yXI8Q_
2FHVOzmZHcwFs7D5WhDYPQwgBHaa7OZXASgLWXsBw

16

A.6

Distribution
• Will the dataset be distributed to third parties outside of the entity (e.g., company, institution,
organization) on behalf of which the dataset was created?
No.
• How will the dataset be distributed (e.g., tarball on website, API, GitHub)?
The dataset is released at https://github.com/glee4810/EHRSQL.
• When will the dataset be distributed?
Now.
• Will the dataset be distributed under a copyright or other intellectual property (IP) license,
and/or under applicable terms of use (ToU)?
The dataset is released under CC BY 4.0 license.
• Have any third parties imposed IP-based or other restrictions on the data associated with the
instances?
No.
• Do any export controls or other regulatory restrictions apply to the dataset or to individual
instances?
No.

A.7

Maintenance
• Who will be supporting/hosting/maintaining the dataset?
The authors of this paper.
• How can the owner/curator/manager of the dataset be contacted (e.g., email address)?
Contact the first author (gyubok.lee@kaist.ac.kr) or other authors.
• Is there an erratum?
No.
• Will the dataset be updated (e.g., to correct labeling errors, add new instances, delete
instances)?
If any correction is needed, we plan to upload a new version.
• If the dataset relates to people, are there applicable limits on the retention of the data
associated with the instances (e.g., were the individuals in question told that their data would
be retained for a fixed period of time and then deleted)?
N/A
• Will older versions of the dataset continue to be supported/hosted/maintained?
We plan to maintain the newest version only.
• If others want to extend/augment/build on/contribute to the dataset, is there a mechanism for
them to do so?
Contact the authors of the paper.

B

Full List of Templates

B.1

Question Templates

The full list of question templates is reported in Table 7. The total number of answerable question
templates is 174, but a few can be unanswerable depending on the database (e.g., a question about
a procedure done in other hospitals is not answerable in MIMIC-III). For unanswerable questions,
the template generation process explained in Section 3.1.1 is not strictly applied. As a result,
unanswerable questions can contain ambiguous and too detailed questions (e.g., Tell me what
medicine to use to relieve a headache in hypertensive patients). We do not provide a full list of
unanswerable questions as they are not subject to training and can be anything complementary to the
answerable ones.
17

Table 7: Full list of answerable question templates.
Patient scope

Question template

Assumption

None

What is the intake method of {drug_name}?

None

What is the cost of a procedure named {procedure_name}?

None

What is the cost of a {lab_name} lab test?

None

What is the cost of a drug named {drug_name}?

None

What is the cost of diagnosing {diagnosis_name}?

None

What does {abbreviation} stand for?

Single

What is the gender of patient {patient_id}?

Single

What is the date of birth of patient {patient_id}?

Single

What was the [time_filter_exact1] length of hospital stay of patient {patient_id}?

Single

What is the change in the weight of patient {patient_id} from the [time_filter_exact2] value
measured [time_filter_global1]?

Single

What is the change in the weight of patient {patient_id} from the [time_filter_exact2] value
measured [time_filter_global2] compared to the [time_filter_exact1] value measured
[time_filter_global1]?

Single

What is the change in the value of {lab_name} of patient {patient_id} from the
[time_filter_exact2] value measured [time_filter_global2] compared to the
[time_filter_exact1] value measured [time_filter_global1]?

Single

What is the change in the {vital_name} of patient {patient_id} from the
[time_filter_exact2] value measured [time_filter_global2] compared to the
[time_filter_exact1] value measured [time_filter_global1]?

Single

Is the value of {lab_name} of patient {patient_id} [time_filter_exact2] measured
[time_filter_global2] [comparison] than the [time_filter_exact1] value measured
[time_filter_global1]?

Single

Is the {vital_name} of patient {patient_id} [time_filter_exact2] measured
[time_filter_global2] [comparison] than the [time_filter_exact1] value measured
[time_filter_global1]?

Single

What is_verb the age of patient {patient_id} [time_filter_global1]?

Single

What is_verb the name of insurance of {patient_id} [time_filter_global1]?

Single

What is_verb the marital status of patient {patient_id} [time_filter_global1]?

Single

What percentile is the value of {lab_value} in a {lab_name} lab test among patients of the same age as
patient {patient_id} [time_filter_global1]?

Single

How many [unit_count] have passed since patient {patient_id} was admitted to the hospital
currently?

Only current
patient

Single

How many [unit_count] have passed since patient {patient_id} was admitted to the ICU currently?

Only current
ICU patient

Single

How many [unit_count] have passed since the [time_filter_exact1] time patient
{patient_id} stayed in careunit {careunit} on the current hospital visit?

Only current
patient

Single

How many [unit_count] have passed since the [time_filter_exact1] time patient
{patient_id} stayed in ward {ward_id} on the current hospital visit?

Only current
patient

Single

How many [unit_count] have passed since the [time_filter_exact1] time patient
{patient_id} received a procedure on the current hospital visit?

Only current
patient

Single

How many [unit_count] have passed since the [time_filter_exact1] time patient
{patient_id} received a {procedure_name} procedure on the current hospital visit?

Only current
patient

Single

How many [unit_count] have passed since the [time_filter_exact1] time patient
{patient_id} was diagnosed with {diagnosis_name} on the current hospital visit?

Only current
patient

Single

How many [unit_count] have passed since the [time_filter_exact1] time patient
{patient_id} was prescribed {drug_name} on the current hospital visit?

Only current
patient

Only current
patients

Continued on next page

18

Table 7: Full list of answerable question templates. (Continued)
Patient scope

Question template

Assumption

Single

How many [unit_count] have passed since the [time_filter_exact1] time patient
{patient_id} received a {lab_name} lab test on the current hospital visit?

Only current
patient

Single

How many [unit_count] have passed since the [time_filter_exact1] time patient
{patient_id} had a {intake_name} intake on the current ICU visit?

Only current
ICU patient

Single

What was the [time_filter_exact1] hospital admission type of patient {patient_id}
[time_filter_global1]?

Single

What was the [time_filter_exact1] ward of patient {patient_id}
[time_filter_global1]?

Single

What was the [time_filter_exact1] careunit of patient {patient_id}
[time_filter_global1]?

Single

What was the [time_filter_exact1] measured height of patient {patient_id}
[time_filter_global1]?

Single

What was the [time_filter_exact1] measured weight of patient {patient_id}
[time_filter_global1]?

Single

What was the name of the diagnosis that patient {patient_id} [time_filter_exact1] received
[time_filter_global1]?

Single

What was the name of the procedure that patient {patient_id} [time_filter_exact1] received
[time_filter_global1]?

Single

What was the name of the drug that patient {patient_id} was [time_filter_exact1] prescribed via
{drug_route} route [time_filter_global1]?

Single

What was the name of the drug that patient {patient_id} was [time_filter_exact1] prescribed
[time_filter_global1]?

Single

What was the name of the drug that patient {patient_id} was prescribed [time_filter_within]
after having been diagnosed with {diagnosis_name} [time_filter_global1]?

Single

What was the name of the drug that patient {patient_id} was prescribed [time_filter_within]
after having received a {procedure_name} procedure [time_filter_global1]?

Single

What was the dose of {drug_name} that patient {patient_id} was [time_filter_exact1]
prescribed [time_filter_global1]?

Single

What was the total amount of dose of {drug_name} that patient {patient_id} were prescribed
[time_filter_global1]?

Single

What was the name of the drug that patient {patient_id} were prescribed [n_times]
[time_filter_global1]?

Single

What is the new prescription of patient {patient_id} [time_filter_global2] compared to the
prescription [time_filter_global1]?

Single

What was the [time_filter_exact1] measured value of a {lab_name} lab test of patient
{patient_id}[time_filter_global1]?

Single

What was the name of the lab test that patient {patient_id} [time_filter_exact1] received
[time_filter_global1]?

Single

what was the [agg_function] {lab_name} value of patient {patient_id}
[time_filter_global1]?

Single

What was the name of the allergy that patient {patient_id} had [time_filter_global1]?

Single

What was the name of the substance that patient {patient_id} was allergic to
[time_filter_global1]?

Single

What was the organism name found in the [time_filter_exact1] {culture_name} microbiology
test of patient {patient_id} [time_filter_global1]?

Single

What was the name of the specimen that patient {patient_id} was [time_filter_exact1] tested
[time_filter_global1]?

Single

What was the name of the intake that patient {patient_id} [time_filter_exact1] had
[time_filter_global1]?

Single

What was the total volume of {intake_name} intake that patient {patient_id} received
[time_filter_global1]?

global filters
do not overlap

Continued on next page

19

Table 7: Full list of answerable question templates. (Continued)
Patient scope

Question template

Assumption

Single

What was the total volume of intake that patient {patient_id} received [time_filter_global1]?

Single

What was the name of the output that patient {patient_id} [time_filter_exact1] had
[time_filter_global1]?

Single

What was the total volume of {output_name} output that patient {patient_id} had
[time_filter_global1]?

Single

What was the total volume of output that patient {patient_id} had [time_filter_global1]?

Single

What is the difference between the total volume of intake and output of patient {patient_id}
[time_filter_global1]?

Single

What was the [time_filter_exact1] measured {vital_name} of patient
{patient_id}[time_filter_global1]?

Single

What was the {agg_function} {vital_name} of patient
{patient_id}[time_filter_global1]?

Single

What is_verb the total hospital cost of patient {patient_id} [time_filter_global1]?

Single

When was the [time_filter_extract1] hospital admission time of patient {patient_id}
[time_filter_global1]?

Single

When was the [time_filter_extract1] hospital admission time that patient {patient_id} was
admitted via {admission_route}[time_filter_global1]?

Single

When was the [time_filter_extract1] hospital discharge time of patient
{patient_id}[time_filter_global1]?

Single

When was the [time_filter_extract1] length of ICU stay of patient {patient_id}?

Single

When was the [time_filter_extract1] time that patient {patient_id} was diagnosed with
{diagnosis_name} [time_filter_global1]?

Single

When was the [time_filter_extract1] procedure time of patient {patient_id}
[time_filter_global1]?

Single

When was the [time_filter_extract1] time that patient {patient_id} received a
{procedure_name} procedure [time_filter_global1]?

Single

When was the [time_filter_extract1] prescription time of patient {patient_id}
[time_filter_global1]?

Single

When was the [time_filter_extract1] time that patient {patient_id} was prescribed
{drug_name} [time_filter_global1]?

Single

When was the [time_filter_extract1] time that patient {patient_id} was prescribed
{drug_name1} and {drug_name2} [time_filter_within] [time_filter_global1]?

Single

When was the [time_filter_extract1] time that patient {patient_id} was prescribed a
medication via {drug_route} route [time_filter_global1]?

Single

When was the [time_filter_extract1] time that patient {patient_id} was prescribed a
medication via {drug_route} route [time_filter_global1]?

Single

When was the [time_filter_extract1] lab test of patient {patient_id}
[time_filter_global1]?

Single

When was the [time_filter_extract1] time that patient {patient_id} received a {lab_test}
lab test [time_filter_global1]?

Single

When was the [time_filter_extract1] time that patient {patient_id} had the [sort] value of
{lab_name} [time_filter_global1]?

Single

When was the [time_filter_extract1] microbiology test of patient {patient_id}
[time_filter_global1]?

Single

When was patient {patient_id}’s [time_filter_extract1] {culture_name} microbiology
test [time_filter_global1]?

Single

When was the [time_filter_extract1] time that patient {patient_id} had a {intake_name}
intake [time_filter_global1]?

No current ICU
patient

Continued on next page

20

Table 7: Full list of answerable question templates. (Continued)
Patient scope

Question template

Assumption

Single

When was the [time_filter_extract1] intake time of patient {patient_id}
[time_filter_global1]?

Single

When was the [time_filter_extract1] time that patient {patient_id} had a {output_name}
output [time_filter_global1]?

Single

When was the [time_filter_extract1] time that patient {patient_id} had a {vital_name}
measured [time_filter_global1]?

Single

When was the [time_filter_extract1] time that the {vital_name} of patient {patient_id}
was [comparison] than {vital_value} [time_filter_global1]?

Single

When was the [time_filter_extract1] time that patient {patient_id} had the [sort]
{vital_name} [time_filter_global1]?

Single

Has_verb patient {patient_id} received a {procedure_name} procedure in other than the current
hospital [time_filter_global1]?

Single

Has_verb patient {patient_id} been admitted to the hospital [time_filter_global1]?

Single

Has_verb patient {patient_id} been to an emergency room [time_filter_global1]?

Single

Has_verb patient {patient_id} received any procedure [time_filter_global1]?

Single

Has_verb patient {patient_id} received a {procedure_name} procedure
[time_filter_global1]?

Single

What was the name of the procedure that patient {patient_id} received [n_times]
[time_filter_global1]?

Single

Has_verb patient {patient_id} received any diagnosis [time_filter_global1]?

Single

Has_verb patient {patient_id} been diagnosed with {diagnosis_name}
[time_filter_global1]?

Single

Has_verb patient {patient_id} been prescribed {drug_name1},{drug_name2}, or {drug_name3}
[time_filter_global1]?

Single

Has_verb patient {patient_id} been prescribed any medication [time_filter_global1]?

Single

Has_verb patient {patient_id} been prescribed {drug_name} [time_filter_global1]?

Single

Has_verb patient {patient_id} received any lab test [time_filter_global1]?

Single

Has_verb patient {patient_id} received a {lab_name} lab test [time_filter_global1]?

Single

Has_verb patient {patient_id} had any allergy [time_filter_global1]?

Single

Has_verb patient {patient_id} had any microbiology test result [time_filter_global1]?

Single

Has_verb patient {patient_id} had any {culture_name} microbiology test result
[time_filter_global1]?

Single

Has_verb there been any organism found in the [time_filter_extract1]{culture_name}
microbiology test of patient {patient_id} [time_filter_global1]?

Single

Has_verb patient {patient_id} had any {intake_name} intake [time_filter_global1]?

Single

Has_verb patient {patient_id} had any {output_name} output [time_filter_global1]?

Single

Has_verb the {vital_name} of patient {patient_id} been ever [comparison] than
{vital_value} [time_filter_global1]?

Single

Has_verb the {vital_name} of patient {patient_id} been normal [time_filter_global1]?

Single

List the hospital admission time of patient {patient_id} [time_filter_global1].

Single

List the [unit_average] [agg_function] {lab_name} lab value of patient {patient_id}
[time_filter_global1].

Single

List the [unit_average] [agg_function] weight of patient {patient_id}
[time_filter_global1].

Single

List the [unit_average] [agg_function] volume of {intake_name} intake that patient
{patient_id} received [time_filter_global1].

Only sample
current patient

Continued on next page

21

Table 7: Full list of answerable question templates. (Continued)
Patient scope

Question template

Assumption

Single

List the [unit_average] [agg_function] volume of {output_name} output that patient
{patient_id} had [time_filter_global1].

Single

List the [unit_average] [agg_function] {vital_name} of patient {patient_id}
[time_filter_global1].

Single

Count the number of hospital visits of patient {patient_id} [time_filter_global1].

Single

Count the number of ICU visits of patient {patient_id} [time_filter_global1].

Single

Count the number of times that patient {patient_id} received a {procedure_name} procedure
[time_filter_global1].

Single

Count the number of drugs patient {patient_id} was prescribed [time_filter_global1].

Single

Count the number of times that patient {patient_id} were prescribed {drug_name}
[time_filter_global1].

Single

Count the number of times that patient {patient_id} received a {lab_name} lab test
[time_filter_global1].

Single

Count the number of times that patient {patient_id} had a {intake_name} intake
[time_filter_global1].

Single

Count the number of times that patient {patient_id} had a {output_name} output
[time_filter_global1].

Group

Count the number of current patients.

Group

Count the number of current patients aged [age_group].

Group

What is the [n_survival_period] survival rate of patients diagnosed with {diagnosis_name}?

Group

What is the [n_survival_period] survival rate of patients who were prescribed {drug_name} after
having been diagnosed with {diagnosis_name}?

Group

What are the top [n_rank] diagnoses that have the highest [n_survival_period] mortality rate?

Group

What is_verb the [agg_fuction] total hospital cost that involves a procedure named
{procedure_name} [time_filter_global1]?

Group

What is_verb the [agg_fuction] total hospital cost that involves a {lab_name} lab test
[time_filter_global1]?

Group

What is_verb the [agg_fuction] total hospital cost that involves a drug named {drug_name}
[time_filter_global1]?

Group

What is_verb the [agg_fuction] total hospital cost that involves a diagnosis named {diagnosis_name}
[time_filter_global1]?

Group

List the IDs of patients diagnosed with {diagnosis_name} [time_filter_global1].

Group

What is_verb the [agg_fuction] [unit_average]number of patient records diagnosed with
{diagnosis_name} [time_filter_global1]?

Group

Count the number of patients who were dead after having been diagnosed with {diagnosis_name}
[time_filter_within] [time_filter_global1].

Group

Count the number of patients who did not come back to the hospital [time_filter_within] after
diagnosed with {diagnosis_name} [time_filter_global1].

Group

Count the number of patients who were admitted to the hospital [time_filter_global1].

Group

Count the number of patients who were discharged from the hospital [time_filter_global1].

Group

Count the number of patients who stayed in ward {ward_id} [time_filter_global1].

Group

Count the number of patients who stayed in careunit{careunit} [time_filter_global1].

Group

Count the number of patients who were diagnosed with{diagnosis_name} [time_filter_within]
after having received a {procedure_name} procedure [time_filter_global1].

Group

Count the number of patients who were diagnosed with{diagnosis_name2} [time_filter_within]
after having been diagnosed with {diagnosed_name1} [time_filter_global1].

Continued on next page

22

Table 7: Full list of answerable question templates. (Continued)
Patient scope

Question template

Assumption

Group

Count the number of patients who were diagnosed with {diagnosis_name}
[time_filter_global1].

Group

Count the number of patients who received a {procedure_name} procedure
[time_filter_global1].

Group

Count the number of patients who received a {procedure_name} procedure [n_times]
[time_filter_global1].

Group

Count the number of patients who received a {procedure_name2} procedure
[time_filter_within] after having received a {procedure_name1} procedure
[time_filter_global1].

Group

Count the number of patients who received a {procedure_name} procedure [time_filter_within]
after having been diagnosed with {diagnosis_name1} [time_filter_global1].

Group

Count the number of {procedure_name} procedure cases [time_filter_global1].

Group

Count the number of patients who were prescribed {drug_name} [time_filter_global1].

Group

Count the number of {drug_name} prescription cases [time_filter_global1].

Group

Count the number of patients who were prescribed {drug_name} [time_filter_within] after having
received a {procedure_name} procedure [time_filter_global1].

Group

Count the number of patients who were prescribed {drug_name} [time_filter_within] after having
been diagnosed with {diagnosis_name} [time_filter_global1].

Group

Count the number of patients who received a {lab_name} lab test [time_filter_global1].

Group

Count the number of patients who received a {culture_name} microbiology test
[time_filter_global1].

Group

Count the number of patients who had a {intake_name} intake [time_filter_global1].

Group

What are_verb the top [n_rank] frequent diagnoses [time_filter_global1]?

Group

What are_verb the top [n_rank] frequent diagnoses of patients aged [age_group]
[time_filter_global1]?

Group

What are_verb the top [n_rank] frequent diagnoses that patients were diagnosed
[time_filter_within] after having received a {procedure_name} procedure
[time_filter_global1]?

Group

What are_verb the top [n_rank] frequent diagnoses that patients were diagnosed
[time_filter_within] after having been diagnosed with {diagnosis_name}
[time_filter_global1]?

Group

What are_verb the top [n_rank] frequent procedures [time_filter_global1]?

Group

What are_verb the top [n_rank] frequent procedures of patients aged [age_group]
[time_filter_global1]?

Group

What are_verb the top [n_rank] frequent procedures that patients received [time_filter_within]
after having received a {procedure_name} procedure [time_filter_global1]?

Group

What are_verb the top [n_rank] frequent procedures that patients received [time_filter_within]
after having been diagnosed with {diagnosis_name} [time_filter_global1]?

Group

What are_verb the top [n_rank] frequently prescribed drugs [time_filter_global1]?

Group

What are_verb the top [n_rank] frequently prescribed drugs of patients aged [age_group]
[time_filter_global1]?

Group

What are_verb the top [n_rank] frequent prescribed drugs for patients who were also prescribed
{drug_name} [time_filter_within] [time_filter_global1]?

Group

What are_verb the top [n_rank] frequent drugs that patients were prescribed [time_filter_within]
after having been prescribed with {drug_name} [time_filter_global1]?

Group

What are_verb the top [n_rank] frequent drugs that patients were prescribed [time_filter_within]
after having received a {procedure_name} procedure [time_filter_global1]?

Group

What are_verb the top [n_rank] frequent drugs that patients were prescribed [time_filter_within]
after having been diagnosed with {diagnosis_name} [time_filter_global1]?

Continued on next page

23

Table 7: Full list of answerable question templates. (Continued)
Patient scope

Question template

Group

What are_verb the top [n_rank] frequently prescribed drugs that patients aged [age_group] were
prescribed [time_filter_within] after having been diagnosed with {diagnosis_name}
[time_filter_global1]?

Group

What are_verb the top [n_rank]frequently prescribed drugs that {gender} patients aged [age_group]
were prescribed [time_filter_within] after having been diagnosed with {diagnosis_name}
[time_filter_global1]?

Group

What are_verb the top [n_rank] frequent lab test [time_filter_global1]?

Group

What are_verb the top [n_rank] frequent lab tests of patients aged [age_group]
[time_filter_global1]?

Group

What are_verb the top [n_rank] frequent lab tests that patients had [time_filter_within] after
having been diagnosed with {diagnosis_name} [time_filter_global1]?

Group

What are_verb the top [n_rank]frequent lab tests that patients had [time_filter_within] after having
received a {procedure_name} procedure [time_filter_global1]?

Group

What are_verb the top [n_rank] frequent specimens tested [time_filter_global1]?

Group

What are_verb the top [n_rank] frequent specimens that patients were tested [time_filter_within]
after having been diagnosed with {diagnosis_name} [time_filter_global1]?

Group

What are_verb the top [n_rank] frequent specimens that patients were tested [time_filter_within]
after having received a {procedure_name} procedure [time_filter_global1]?

Group

What are_verb the top [n_rank] frequent intake events [time_filter_global1]?

Group

What are_verb the top [n_rank] frequent output events [time_filter_global1]?

Assumption

Several question templates assume a specific range of patients (e.g., current patients or already
discharged patients), as indicated in the “Assumption” column in Table 7. For example, depending on
the patients, the way to calculate the duration of hospital stay can be different. The SQL query for
already discharged patients (i.e., What was the [time_filter_exact1] length of hospital stay
of patient patient_id?) calculates the time between the hospital admission and discharge, while
the same query for the current patients (i.e., How many [unit_count] have passed since patient
patient_id was admitted to the hospital currently?) calculates the time between the hospital
admission and current time. We intentionally separated the templates to make the model better
understand the hidden assumptions behind user utterances.
Time slots with numbering (e.g., [time_filter_global1] and [time_filter_global2]
) are the variants of the time slot without numbering (e.g., [time_filter_global]).
The purpose of the numbering is to indicate the temporal order of time filters. Specifically, a higher number indicates the same or a later time for [time_filter_global1]
and [time_filter_global2], and [time_filter_exact2] must be later than
[time_filter_exact1].
Some verbs that end with “_verb” in question templates indicate that the verb tense can change
depending on the sampled time templates.

B.2

Time Templates

Table 8 shows the full list of time templates with natural language (NL) time expressions and SQL
time patterns. Based on the time filter types present in question templates, time templates are sampled,
and their corresponding NL time expressions and SQL time patterns are added to the question
templates and SQL queries. Column slots in the SQL time patterns such as [time_column]
and [hospital_dischargetime] are replaced with the actual column names following the
database schema. The blanks for the NL time expressions and SQL time patterns in the table indicate
that no time filter is applied.
24

Table 8: Full list of NL time expressions and their corresponding SQL time patterns.
Time filter type Expression type

Unit

Interval type Option

NL time expression

SQL time pattern

global

-

-

-

-

global

relative

hospital

in

first

on the first hospital visit

WHERE [hospital_dischargetime] IS NOT NULL
ORDER BY [hospital_admittime] ASC LIMIT 1

global

relative

hospital

in

last

on the last hospital visit

WHERE [hospital_dischargetime] IS NOT NULL
ORDER BY [hospital_admittime] DESC LIMIT 1

global

relative

hospital

in

current

on the current hospital visit

WHERE [hospital_dischargetime] IS NULL

global

relative

ICU

in

first

on the first ICU visit

WHERE [icu_dischargetime] IS NOT NULL ORDER
BY [icu_admittime] ASC LIMIT 1

global

relative

ICU

in

last

on the last ICU visit

WHERE [icu_dischargetime] IS NOT NULL ORDER
BY [icu_admittime] DESC LIMIT 1

global

relative

ICU

in

current

on the current ICU visit

WHERE [icu_dischargetime] IS NULL

global

relative

year

in

last

last year

WHERE datetime([time_column],'start of
year') = datetime(current_time,'start of
year ','-1 year')

global

relative

year

until

last

until last year

WHERE datetime([time_column],'start of
year') <= datetime(current_time,'start of
year ','-1 year')

global

relative

year

since

last

since last year

WHERE datetime([time_column],'start of
year') >= datetime(current_time,'start of
year ','-1 year')

global

relative

year

in

this

this year

WHERE datetime([time_column],'start of
year') = datetime(current_time,'start of
year ','-0 year')

global

relative

year

until

-

until {year} year ago

WHERE datetime([time_column]) <=
datetime(current_time,'-{year} year')

global

relative

year

since

-

since {year} year ago

WHERE datetime([time_column]) >=
datetime(current_time,'-{year} year')

global

relative

month

in

last

last month

WHERE datetime([time_column],'start of
month') = datetime(current_time,'start of
month','-1 month')

global

relative

month

until

last

until last month

WHERE datetime([time_column],'start of
month') <= datetime(current_time,'start of
month','-1 month')

global

relative

month

since

last

since last month

WHERE datetime([time_column],'start of
month') >= datetime(current_time,'start of
month','-1 month')

global

relative

month

in

this

this month

WHERE datetime([time_column],'start of
month') = datetime(current_time,'start of
month','-0 month')

global

relative

month

until

-

until {month} month ago

WHERE datetime([time_column]) <=
datetime(current_time,'-{month} month')

global

relative

month

since

-

since {month} month ago

WHERE datetime([time_column]) >=
datetime(current_time,'-{month} month')

global

relative

day

in

last

yesterday

WHERE datetime([time_column],'start of
day') = datetime(current_time,'start of
day','-1 day')

global

relative

day

in

last

until yesterday

WHERE datetime([time_column],'start of
day') <= datetime(current_time,'start of
day','-1 day')

global

relative

day

in

last

since yesterday

WHERE datetime([time_column],'start of
day') >= datetime(current_time,'start of
day','-1 day')

global

relative

day

in

this

today

WHERE datetime([time_column],'start of
day') = datetime(current_time,'start of
day','-0 day')

global

relative

day

until

-

until {day} day ago

WHERE datetime([time_column]) <=
datetime(current_time,'-{day} day')

global

relative

day

since

-

since {day} day ago

WHERE datetime([time_column]) >=
datetime(current_time,'-{day} day')

global

absolute

year

in

-

in {year}

WHERE strftime('%Y',[time_column])= '{year}'

global

absolute

year

until

-

until {year}

WHERE strftime('%Y',[time_column]) <=
'{year}'

Continued on next page
25

Table 8: Full list of NL time expressions and their corresponding SQL time patterns. (Continued)
Time filter type Expression type

Unit

Interval type Option

NL time expression

SQL time pattern

global

absolute

year

since

-

since {year}

WHERE strftime('%Y',[time_column]) >=
'{year}'

global

absolute

month

in

-

in {month}/{year}

WHERE strftime('%Y-%m',[time_column])=
'{year}-{month}'

global

absolute

month

until

-

until {month}/{year}

WHERE strftime('%Y-%m',[time_column]) <=
'{year}-{month}'

global

absolute

month

since

-

since {month}/{year}

WHERE strftime('%Y-%m',[time_column]) >=
'{year}-{month}'

global

absolute

day

in

-

on {month}/{day}/{year}

WHERE strftime('%Y-%m-%d',[time_column]) =
'{year}-{month}-{day}'

global

absolute

day

until

-

until {month}/{day}/{year}

WHERE strftime('%Y-%m-%d',[time_column]) <=
'{year}-{month}-{day}'

global

absolute

day

since

-

WHERE strftime('%Y-%m-%d',[time_column]) >=
since {month}/{day}/{year}
'{year}-{month}{day}'

global

mix

month

in

last

in {month}/last year

WHERE datetime([time_column],'start of
year') = datetime(current_time,'start of
year','-1 year') AND
strftime('%m',[time_column]) = '{month}'

global

mix

month

in

this

in {month}/this year

WHERE datetime([time_column],'start of
year') = datetime(current_time,'start of
year','-0 year') AND
strftime('%m',[time_column]) = '{month}'

global

mix

day

in

last

WHERE datetime([time_column],'start of
year') = datetime(current_time,'start of
on {month}/{day}/last year year','-1 year') AND
strftime('%m-%d',[time_column]) =
'{month}-{day}'

global

mix

day

in

this

WHERE datetime([time_column],'start of
year') = datetime(current_time,'start of
on {month}/{day}/this year year','-0 year') AND
strftime('%m-%d',[time_column]) =
'{month}-{day}'

global

mix

day

in

last

on last month/{day}

WHERE datetime([time_column],'start of
month') = datetime(current_time,'start of
month','-1 month') AND
strftime('%d',[time_column]) = '{day}'

global

mix

day

in

this

on this month/{day}

WHERE datetime([time_column],'start of
month') = datetime(current_time,'start of
month','-0 month') AND
strftime('%d',[time_column]) = '{day}'

within

-

-

-

-

within

-

hospital

in

-

within the same hospital visit

within

-

ICU

in

-

within the same icu visit

within

-

year

in

-

within the same year

WHERE datetime([time_column1],'start of
year') = datetime([time_column2],'start of
year'

within

-

n_year

in

-

within {year} year

WHERE datetime([time_column2]) BETWEEN
datetime([time_column1] AND
datetime([time_column1],'+{year} year'

within

-

month

in

-

within the same month

WHERE datetime([time_column1],'start of
month') = datetime([time_column2],'start
of month'

within

-

n_month

in

-

within {month} month

WHERE datetime([time_column2]) BETWEEN
datetime([time_column1] AND
datetime([time_column1],'+{month} month'

within

-

day

in

-

within the same day

WHERE datetime([time_column1],'start of
day') = datetime([time_column2],'start of
day'

within

-

n_day

in

-

within {day} day

WHERE datetime([time_column2]) BETWEEN
datetime([time_column1] AND
datetime([time_column1],'+{day} day'

within

-

exact

in

-

at the same time

WHERE datetime([time_column1]) =
datetime([time_column2])

WHERE [hospital_admission_id1] =
[hospital_admission_id2]
WHERE [icu_admission_id1] =
[icu_admission_id2]

Continued on next page

26

Table 8: Full list of NL time expressions and their corresponding SQL time patterns. (Continued)
Time filter type Expression type

Unit

Interval type Option

NL time expression

SQL time pattern

exact

relative

exact

at

-

first

ORDER BY [time_column] ASC LIMIT 1

exact

relative

exact

at

-

second

ORDER BY [time_column] ASC LIMIT 1 OFFSET 1

exact

relative

exact

at

-

second to last

ORDER BY [time_column] DESC LIMIT 1 OFFSET
1

exact

relative

exact

at

-

exact

absolute

exact

at

last

ORDER BY [time_column1] DESC LIMIT 1

at {year}-{month}-{day} WHERE datetime([time_column]) =
{hour}
'{year}-{month}-{day} {hour}:{minute}
:{minute}:{second}
:{second}'

-

Time templates with the option “this” are not combined with the interval type of “since” or “until”
because combining “this” with “since” is equivalent to combining “this” with “in” (i.e., since this
year is equivalent to this year). Additionally, combining “this” with “until” is equivalent to no time
constraint (i.e., until this year is equivalent to no time filter).
In relative time expressions, the concept of N units before the current time is ambiguous because one
year ago and the last year can differ depending on the context. Therefore, we strictly define “N units
ago” as a time point exactly N units before the current time (e.g., one year ago of the current time
2105-12-31 23:59:00 is 2104-12-31 23:59:00) and they can be combined with the “until” and “since”
interval types. Figure 5 illustrates several time templates.

current time

since last year

current time

since last year

since 3 years ago, since 07/01/2102, since 07/2102
2101-01-01 00:00:00

since 3 years ago, since 07/01/2102, since 07/2102

2102-01-01 00:00:00

2101-01-01 00:00:00

2103-01-01 00:00:00

2102-01-01 00:00:00

2103-01-01 00:00:00

2104-01-01 00:00:00

2104-01-01 00:00:00

until 3 years ago

last year

last year

until 3 years ago

2105-01-01 00:00:00

2105-01-01 00:00:00

this year
this year

until
last year
until last year
2101-07-01 00:00:00
2101-07-01 00:00:00

2102-07-01
00:00:00
2102-07-01
00:00:00

2103-07-01 00:00:00
2103-07-01
00:00:00

2104-07-01
00:00:0000:00:00
2104-07-01

since last year

WHERE datetime([time_column],'start of year') >= datetime('2105-07-01 00:00:00','start of year','-1 year')

since 3 years ago

WHERE datetime([time_column]) >= datetime('2105-07-01 00:00:00','-3 year')

since 07/01/2102

WHERE strftime('%Y-%m-%d',[time_column]) >= '2105-07-01'

since 07/2102

WHERE strftime('%Y-%m',[time_column]) >= '2105-07'

this year

WHERE datetime([time_column],'start of year') = datetime('2105-07-01 00:00:00','start of year','-0 year')

last year

WHERE datetime([time_column],'start of year') = datetime('2105-07-01 00:00:00','start of year','-1 year')

until 3 years ago

WHERE datetime([time_column]) <= datetime('2105-07-01 00:00:00','-3 year')

until last year

WHERE datetime([time_column],'start of year') <= datetime('2105-07-01 00:00:00','start of year','-1 year')

2105-07-01 00:00:00
2105-07-01 00:00:00

Figure 5: Illustration of time templates.

B.3

Template Combination

As question templates can be combined with multiple slots, we tagged each question to track what
time templates and pre-defined values are combined to form the final question. Each tag (Q_tag,
O_tag, and T_tag) represents Stages 0, 1, and 2 in Figure 3. Except for Q_tag, which indicates the
question template, O_tag and T_tag have fixed numbers of placeholders that store each sampled
template and value. O_tag stores nine different types of operation values in a tuple: ([age_group],
[agg_function], [comparison], [n_rank], [n_survival_period], [n_times],
[sort], [unit_average], [unit_count]), sampled in Stage 1.
T_tag stores
time templates in a tuple: ([time_filter_global1], [time_filter_global2],
[time_filter_within], [time_filter_exact1], [time_filter_exact2]), sampled in Stage 2.
27

A full list of the operation values is reported in Table 9. Similar to time templates, the operation
values have both NL expressions and SQL patterns.
Table 9: Pre-defined operation values.

C

Operation value type

NL operation expression

[age_group]

20's
30's
40's
50's
60 or above

WHERE [age_col] BETWEEN 20 AND 29
WHERE [age_col] BETWEEN 30 AND 39
WHERE [age_col] BETWEEN 40 AND 49
WHERE [age_col] BETWEEN 50 AND 59
WHERE [age_col] >= 60

SQL operation pattern

[age_function]

maximum
minimum
average

MAX
MIN
AVG

[comparison]

greater
less

>
<

[n_rank]

three
four
five

3
4
5

[n_survival_period]

one year
two year
three year
four year
five year

1 * 365
2 * 365
3 * 365
4 * 365
5 * 365

[n_times]

two times
two or more times

=2
>= 2

[sort]

min
max

[unit_average]

yearly
monthly
daily

GROUP BY strftime('%Y',[time_col])
GROUP BY strftime('%Y-%m',[time_col])
GROUP BY strftime('%Y-%m-%d',[time_col])

[unit_count]

days
hours

1*
24 *

ORDER BY [sort_col] ASC LIMIT 1
ORDER BY [sort_col] DESC LIMIT 1

SQL Labeling Details

Since the questions were collected independently of the database schema, our SQL labeling process
required us to make numerous assumptions. Below is a list of the assumptions we made to label the
queries.
C.1

Shared Assumptions
• The age of a patient is calculated only once at each hospital admission time. Therefore, even
if a patient stays more than a year without hospital discharge, the age remains the same.
• To count the number of patients or hospital (or ICU) visits, DISTINCT is used in the
SELECT clause.
• The queries about the cost of or drug routes use DISTINCT.
• When retrieving a lab value or vital sign, only the value is returned, not the unit of measurement.
• DENSE_RANK is used for ranking questions, meaning multiple items with the same ranks
can be returned together. For example, a query asking about the top three frequent diagnoses
may retrieve more than three diagnosis names when items with the same rank exist in the
answer. Additionally, the retrieved results can be fewer than the expected number N when
the number of diagnoses under some conditions is smaller than the expected number.
• When a question is related to both death and diagnosis, only the first diagnosis time is
considered.
• When calculating the N-year survival rate, if a death record exists between the first diagnosis
time and N years later, it counts as death. But if there is no death record within N years or
the death happens after N years, it counts as survived.
• The current time and normal ranges of vital signs are post-processed after SQL generation
so that they are independent of the modeling pipeline when the value changes.
28

• The vital signs we consider in the dataset are body temperature, SaO2, heart rate, respiratory
rate, and blood pressures (systemic systolic, diastolic, and mean).
C.1.1

Assumptions in MIMIC-III
• Diagnosis and procedure times are not available in the original database. To address this,
we manually set diagnosis time as hospital admission time and procedure time as hospital
discharge time. Thus, questions asking about current patients’ procedure time are excluded
in the MIMIC-III questions.
• Among many items in the CHARTEVENTS table, we only use weight, height, and the seven
vital sign values.
• We use INPUTEVENTS_CV instead of INPUTEVENTS_MV for input events as it contains
more records and one time column per record (charttime), which is more closely aligned
with eICU’s intakeoutput table.
• For input and output events, we only use values stored in milliliters (mL) in the case of
numerical reasoning within or between input and output events.

C.1.2

Assumptions in eICU
• Diagnosis and treatment tables have path-based names for each record. Instead of using
them directly, the paths are further pre-processed to have shorter names.
• For vital signs, we choose the vitalperiodic table as it contains more records.
• Questions about drug dose are not considered in eICU as drug doses are stored in free-text
(values and units are mixed).

C.2

Mapping Between Condition Value Slots and Column Names

The mapping between condition value slots and column names in both MIMIC-III and eICU is shown
in Table 10.
Table 10: Schema mapping in both MIMIC-III and eICU.
Condition value slots

MIMIC-III

{abbreviation}

d_icd_procedures.short_title
d_icd_diagnoses.short_title

eICU
-

{admission_route}

admissions.admission_location

patient.hospitaladmitsource

{careunit}

transfers.curr_careunit

-

{culture_name}

microbiologyevents.spec_type_desc

microlab.culturesite

{diagnosis_name}

d_icd_diagnoses.short_title

diagnosis.diagnosisname

{drug_name}

prescriptions.drug_name

medication.drugname

{drug_route}

prescriptions.route

medication.routeadmin

{gender}

patients.gender

patient.gender

{intake_name}

d_items.label

intakeoutput.celllabel

{lab_name}

d_labitems.label

lab.labname

{lab_value}

labevents.valuenum

lab.labresult

{output_name}

d_items.label

intakeoutput.celllabel

{patient_id}

patients.subject_id

patient.uniquepid

{procedure_name}

d_icd_procedures.short_title

treatment.treatmentname

{vital_name}

d_items.label

-

{vital_value}

chartevents.valuenum

vitalperiodic.temperature,
vitalperiodic.sao2,
vitalperiodic.heartrate,
vitalperiodic.respiration,
vitalperiodic.systemicsystolic,
vitalperiodic.systemicdiastolic,
vitalperiodic.systemicmean

{ward_id}

transfers.curr_wardid

patient.wardid

29

<Question>

How much of a difference is there in patient 2518's weight last measured on the current
hospital visit compared to the second to last value measured on the current hospital visit?

<JOIN-based query>

<Nesting-based query>

SELECT
(
SELECT chartevents.valuenum
FROM chartevents
WHERE chartevents.icustay_id IN (
SELECT icustays.icustay_id
FROM icustays
WHERE icustays.hadm_id IN (
SELECT admissions.hadm_id
FROM admissions
WHERE admissions.subject_id = 2518
and admissions.dischtime is null
)
)
AND chartevents.itemid IN (
SELECT d_items.itemid
FROM d_items
WHERE d_items.label = 'admit wt'
AND d_items.linksto = 'chartevents'
)
ORDER BY chartevents.charttime DESC LIMIT 1
)
(
SELECT chartevents.valuenum
FROM chartevents
WHERE chartevents.icustay_id IN (
SELECT icustays.icustay_id
FROM icustays
WHERE icustays.hadm_id IN (
SELECT admissions.hadm_id
FROM admissions
WHERE admissions.subject_id = 2518
and admissions.dischtime is null
)
)
AND chartevents.itemid IN (
SELECT d_items.itemid
FROM d_items
WHERE d_items.label = 'admit wt'
AND d_items.linksto = 'chartevents'
)
ORDER BY chartevents.charttime DESC LIMIT 1 offset 1
)

SELECT
(
SELECT chartevents.valuenum
FROM chartevents
JOIN d_items
ON chartevents.itemid = d_items.itemid
JOIN icustays
ON chartevents.icustay_id = icustays.icustay_id
JOIN admissions
ON icustays.hadm_id = admissions.hadm_id
WHERE admissions.subject_id = 2518
AND d_items.label = 'admit wt'
AND d_items.linksto = 'chartevents'
AND admissions.dischtime IS NULL
ORDER BY chartevents.charttime DESC LIMIT 1
)
(
SELECT chartevents.valuenum
FROM chartevents
JOIN d_items
ON chartevents.itemid = d_items.itemid
JOIN icustays
ON chartevents.icustay_id = icustays.icustay_id
JOIN admissions
ON icustays.hadm_id = admissions.hadm_id
WHERE admissions.subject_id = 2518
AND d_items.label = 'admit wt'
AND d_items.linksto = 'chartevents'
AND admissions.dischtime IS NULL
ORDER BY chartevents.charttime DESC LIMIT 1 OFFSET 1
)

Figure 6: JOIN-based and nesting-based queries.

C.3

Comparison Between JOIN-based and Nesting-based Queries

Unlike most other semantic parsing datasets, the SQL queries in EHRSQL are labeled in a nested
manner. Table 6 shows a comparison between queries with the naive use of JOIN and nesting. In
terms of query length, JOIN-based queries are much shorter, but it is hard to follow the semantics in
the queries. However, even if the length of the queries is long, T5 models are able to fully generate a
long sequence of SQL (see Table 12 for qualitative results). As for execution speed, the naive use of
JOIN takes almost four times slower than a nesting-based query in some cases (0.04 vs. 0.15 secs),
as shown in Figure 6.

D

Database Pre-processing Details

D.1

Database Pre-processing Rules
• Patients aged 11 to 89 are included. In eICU, ages recorded as “> 89” are mapped to 90 and
thus retained.
• 1,000 patients are sampled to cover a greater number of medical events (MIMICSQL and
emrKBQA use 100 patients).
• When the same type of value has multiple units of measurement, only the value with the
most common unit is retained and other values are removed from the database.
• All records are lower-cased.

D.2

Time-shifting Process

To include questions with relative time expressions, we manually time-shift each patient’s hospital
records. Specifically, we sample a random time point (between 2100 and 2105) to set the time of
the first hospital visit. Then, we time-shift the whole patient records to the sampled time point while
keeping all the record intervals the same. Additionally, we constrain the number of current patients to
30

10% of the total number of patients in patient sampling since any questions can be asked with relative
time expressions, such as yesterday and last month.
D.3

De-identification Process

Even though MIMIC-III and eICU are de-identified databases, they still contain patient-specific
information. In our case, when one or more condition values are sampled along with a patient ID,
there is a risk that the question and its paired SQL query might reveal patient-specific information.
To avoid such risk, we randomly shuffle records of diagnosis, procedure, lab tests, prescription, chart
events, input events, output events, microbiology tests, care units, and ward IDs across patients in the
database, while keeping the time of the records the same.

E

Template Paraphrasing Pipeline

Figure 7: Template paraphrasing pipeline.
The overall template paraphrasing pipeline is illustrated in Figure 7.

F

Data Splitting

We constrain the training, validation, and test sets to contain all question templates, but the template
paraphrases do not overlap between the splits.
• Training set: We provide more text-to-SQL pairs to question templates with a greater number
of slots. Specifically, question templates with fewer than three slots are assigned thirty to
sixty pairs. Questions with three or more slots and fewer than five receive forty to eighty
pairs; questions with five or more slots receive fifty to one hundred pairs per question
template.
• Validation set: The number of pairs per question template is sampled between four and five.
• Test set: Data sampling rules are identical to those of the validation set, except that we
assign higher weights on the question templates that are considered important, which are
labeled in “high,” “medium,” “low,” and “n/a” (not available) by a physician. With a score
of 3 for “high,” 2 for “medium,” 1 for the rest, the final number of pairs in the test set is
multiplied by the importance score for each question template.
• Unanswerable question: They are assigned to the validation and test sets so that each split
makes up 33%.
31

G

Training Details

We use pre-trained T5-base models from Hugging Face13 for both the no schema and schema versions.
Without a schema, the model is trained to translate from natural questions to SQL queries. With a
schema, we additionally append schema information to the questions. The training and evaluation
configurations are in Table 11. All models are trained on NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090s.
Table 11: T5-base fine-tuning configurations.
Training
Total training step
Batch size
Max length
Optimizer
Learning rate
Learning rate scheduler
Max gradient norm
Weight decay
Validation step

100,000
32
512
Adam
1e-4
Fixed
1.0
0.1
5,000

Evaluation
Num beams
Repetition penalty
Length penalty

H

Qualitative Results

H.1

SQL Generation by Question Complexity

5
1.0
1.0

Table 12 shows samples of generated SQL queries by the number of slots. A T5-base model trained
on MIMIC-III can generate a very long sequence of SQL queries if they are seen in the training
data. In most cases, the errors do not come from generating complex, long nested queries, but from
failures in schema linking (identifying references of columns, tables, and condition values in natural
utterances).
H.2

SQL Generation with Different Time Expressions

Table 13 shows generated SQL samples with different time templates. The column Seen vs. Unseen
indicates whether the exact question template (Q_tag) and time template (T_tag) combination is seen
during training. Interestingly, the model can correctly generate SQL queries for both seen and unseen
combinations.
H.3

Falsely Executed and Refused Results

Table 14 and 15 show samples of falsely executed and refused questions, respectively. Falsely
executed results are retrieved results of the model even though the input question is unanswerable
(see Table 14). These errors are fatal mistakes that a healthcare QA system must avoid, as retrieving
incorrect information may lead to wrong clinical decisions.
Table 15 shows refused results of the model. In some cases, the model might be able to generate the
SQL query, but chooses not to execute it due to low confidence.

13

https://huggingface.co/

32

Table 12: SQL generation results by complexity.
Number of slots

Question

1

what is the method for ingestion of danazol?

select distinct prescriptions.route from prescriptions
where prescriptions.drug = 'danazol'

select distinct prescriptions.route from prescriptions
where prescriptions.drug = 'ingestion of danazol'

2

how many patients were given temporary
tracheostomy?

select count( distinct admissions.subject_id ) from
admissions where admissions.hadm_id in ( select
procedures_icd.hadm_id from procedures_icd where
procedures_icd.icd9_code = ( select
d_icd_procedures.icd9_code from d_icd_procedures where
d_icd_procedures.short_title = 'temporary tracheostomy') )

select count( distinct admissions.subject_id ) from
admissions where admissions.hadm_id in ( select
procedures_icd.hadm_id from procedures_icd where
procedures_icd.icd9_code = ( select
d_icd_procedures.icd9_code from d_icd_procedures where
d_icd_procedures.short_title = 'procedures_icd') )

2

tell me the length of the hospital stay of
the last hospital stay of patient 3745.

select strftime('%J',admissions.dischtime) strftime('%J',admissions.admittime) from admissions where
admissions.subject_id = 3745 and admissions.dischtime is
not null order by admissions.admittime desc limit 1

select strftime('%J',admissions.dischtime) strftime('%J',admissions.admittime) from admissions where
admissions.subject_id = 3745 and admissions.dischtime is
not null order by admissions.admittime desc limit 1

tell me the percentile of mcv 97.0 in
patients of the same age as patient 2127
during the last hospital visit?

select distinct t1.c1 from ( select labevents.valuenum,
percent_rank() over ( order by labevents.valuenum ) as c1
from labevents where labevents.itemid in ( select
d_labitems.itemid from d_labitems where d_labitems.label
='mcv') and labevents.hadm_id in ( select
admissions.hadm_id from admissions where admissions.age = (
select admissions.age from admissions where
admissions.subject_id = 2127 and admissions.dischtime is
not null order by admissions.admittime desc limit 1 ) ) )
as t1 where t1.valuenum = 97.0

select distinct t1.c1 from ( select labevents.valuenum,
percent_rank() over ( order by labevents.valuenum ) as c1
from labevents where labevents.itemid in ( select
d_labitems.itemid from d_labitems where d_labitems.label
='mcv') and labevents.hadm_id in ( select
admissions.hadm_id from admissions where admissions.age = (
select admissions.age from admissions where
admissions.subject_id = 2127 and admissions.dischtime is
not null order by admissions.admittime desc limit 1 ) ) )
as t1 where t1.valuenum = 97.0

what's the potassium change/difference of
patient 99747 second measured on the last
hospital visit compared to the first value
measured on the last hospital visit?

select ( select labevents.valuenum from labevents where
labevents.hadm_id in ( select admissions.hadm_id from
admissions where admissions.subject_id = 99747 and
admissions.dischtime is not null order by
admissions.admittime desc limit 1 ) and labevents.itemid in
( select d_labitems.itemid from d_labitems where
d_labitems.label = 'potassium') order by
labevents.charttime asc limit 1 offset 1 ) - ( select
labevents.valuenum from labevents where labevents.hadm_id
in ( select admissions.hadm_id from admissions where
admissions.subject_id = 99747 and admissions.dischtime is
not null order by admissions.admittime desc limit 1 ) and
labevents.itemid in ( select d_labitems.itemid from
d_labitems where d_labitems.label = 'potassium') order by
labevents.charttime asc limit 1 )

select ( select labevents.valuenum from labevents where
labevents.hadm_id in ( select admissions.hadm_id from
admissions where admissions.subject_id = 99747 and
admissions.dischtime is not null order by
admissions.admittime desc limit 1 ) and labevents.itemid in
( select d_labitems.itemid from d_labitems where
d_labitems.label = 'potassium') order by
labevents.charttime asc limit 1 offset 1 ) - ( select
labevents.valuenum from labevents where labevents.hadm_id
in ( select admissions.hadm_id from admissions where
admissions.subject_id = 99747 and admissions.dischtime is
not null order by admissions.admittime desc limit 1 ) and
labevents.itemid in ( select d_labitems.itemid from
d_labitems where d_labitems.label = 'potassium') order by
labevents.charttime asc limit 1 )

4

6

Real SQL

Generated SQL

Table 13: SQL generation results with different time expressions.
Question

Real SQL & Generated SQL

Q_tag × T_tag

Seen vs.
Unseen

the first care unit of patient 46422 since
2101 is?

select transfers.careunit from transfers where
transfers.hadm_id in ( select admissions.hadm_id from
admissions where admissions.subject_id = 46422 ) and
transfers.careunit is not null and
strftime('%Y',transfers.intime) >= '2101' order by
transfers.intime asc limit 1

what was the [time_filter_exact1] careunit of
patient {patient_id} [time_filter_global1]?
×
('abs-year-since', '', '', 'exact-first', '')

seen

what is the first careunit that patient
53089 stayed on the last hospital
encounter?

select transfers.careunit from transfers where
transfers.hadm_id in ( select admissions.hadm_id from
admissions where admissions.subject_id = 53089 and
admissions.dischtime is not null order by
admissions.admittime desc limit 1 ) and transfers.careunit
is not null order by transfers.intime asc limit 1

what was the [time_filter_exact1] careunit of
patient {patient_id} [time_filter_global1]?
×
('rel-hosp-last', '', '', 'exact-first', '')

unseen

count the number of patients that were
prescribed aspirin ec within 2 months
after having received a venous cath nec
procedure until 4 years ago.

select count( distinct t1.subject_id ) from ( select
admissions.subject_id, procedures_icd.charttime from
procedures_icd join admissions on procedures_icd.hadm_id =
admissions.hadm_id where procedures_icd.icd9_code = (
select d_icd_procedures.icd9_code from d_icd_procedures
where d_icd_procedures.short_title ='venous cath nec') and
datetime(procedures_icd.charttime) <= datetime('2105-12-31
23:59:00','-4 year') ) as t1 join ( select
admissions.subject_id, prescriptions.startdate from
prescriptions join admissions on prescriptions.hadm_id =
admissions.hadm_id where prescriptions.drug = 'aspirin ec'
and datetime(prescriptions.startdate) <=
datetime('2105-12-31 23:59:00','-4 year') ) as t2 on
t1.subject_id = t2.subject_id where t1.charttime <
t2.startdate and datetime(t2.startdate) between datetime(
t1.charttime) and datetime(t1.charttime,'+2 month')

count the number of patients who were
prescribed {drug_name}
[time_filter_within] after having
received a {procedure_name} procedure
[time_filter_global1].
×
('rel-year-until', '', 'within-n_month', '', '')

seen

how many patients were prescribed
levothyroxine sodium within 2 months since
2105 after the procedure of cath base
invasv ep test.

select count( distinct t1.subject_id ) from ( select
admissions.subject_id, procedures_icd.charttime from
procedures_icd join admissions on procedures_icd.hadm_id =
admissions.hadm_id where procedures_icd.icd9_code = (
select d_icd_procedures.icd9_code from d_icd_procedures
where d_icd_procedures.short_title = 'cath base invasv ep
test') and strftime('%Y',procedures_icd.charttime) >=
'2105' ) as t1 join ( select admissions.subject_id,
prescriptions.startdate from prescriptions join admissions
on prescriptions.hadm_id = admissions.hadm_id where
prescriptions.drug = 'levothyroxine sodium' and
strftime('%Y',prescriptions.startdate) >= '2105' ) as t2 on
t1.subject_id = t2.subject_id where t1.charttime <
t2.startdate and datetime(t2.startdate) between datetime(
t1.charttime) and datetime(t1.charttime,'+2 month')

count the number of patients who were
prescribed {drug_name}
[time_filter_within] after having
received a {procedure_name} procedure
[time_filter_global1].
×
('abs-year-since', '', 'within-n_month', '', '')

unseen

H.4

Entropy Distribution of the Model Outcome

Figure 8 shows the maximum entropy values generated from T5. As the ground-truth labels (ANS:
answerable; UnANS: unanswerable) indicate, the distributions of entropy values between answerable
and unanswerable questions are significantly different (< 0.001 with the Mann-Whitney U test).
Similar patterns are observed in models trained on eICU.
33

Table 14: Falsely executed results.
Question

Real SQL

Generated SQL

what was the duration of the packed cell
transfusion procedure for patient 9566?

nan

select strftime('%J',admissions.dischtime) strftime('%J',procedures_icd.charttime) from procedures_icd
where procedures_icd.icd9_code = ( select
d_icd_procedures.icd9_code from d_icd_procedures where
d_icd_procedures.short_title = ’packed cell transfusion’ ) )

Retrieved Answer

how long did it take to get venous cath nec for
patient 31854?

nan

select strftime('%J',admissions.dischtime) strftime('%J',admissions.admittime) from admissions where
admissions.subject_id = 31854 and admissions.dischtime is
not null order by admissions.admittime asc limit 1

Comment
Execution
error

[(8.61111111100763,)]

Incorrect answer
retrieved

Table 15: Refused results of both correct and incorrect samples.
Question

Real SQL

Generated SQL

Comment

how many patients were prescribed with
magnesium sulfate within the same month after
the treatment of cont inv mec ven <96 hrs?

select count( distinct t1.subject_id ) from ( select
admissions.subject_id, procedures_icd.charttime from
procedures_icd join admissions on procedures_icd.hadm_id =
admissions.hadm_id where procedures_icd.icd9_code =
( select d_icd_procedures.icd9_code from d_icd_procedures
where d_icd_procedures.short_title = 'cont inv mec ven <96
hrs') ) as t1 join ( select admissions.subject_id,
prescriptions.startdate from prescriptions join admissions
on prescriptions.hadm_id = admissions.hadm_id where
prescriptions.drug ='magnesium sulfate') as t2 on
t1.subject_id = t2.subject_id where t1.charttime <
t2.startdate and datetime(t1.charttime,’start of month’) =
datetime(t2.startdate,'start of month')

select count( distinct t1.subject_id ) from ( select
admissions.subject_id, procedures_icd.charttime from
procedures_icd join admissions on procedures_icd.hadm_id =
admissions.hadm_id where procedures_icd.icd9_code =
( select d_icd_procedures.icd9_code from d_icd_procedures
where d_icd_procedures.short_title = 'cont inv mec ven <96
hrs') ) as t1 join ( select admissions.subject_id,
prescriptions.startdate from prescriptions join admissions
on prescriptions.hadm_id = admissions.hadm_id where
prescriptions.drug ='magnesium sulfate') as t2 on
t1.subject_id = t2.subject_id where t1.charttime <
t2.startdate and datetime(t1.charttime,’start of month’) =
datetime(t2.startdate,'start of month')

Correctly generated
but refused

select distinct prescriptions.route from prescriptions
where prescriptions.drug = 'naproxen'

select inputevents_cv.amount from inputevents_cv where
inputevents_cv.icustay_id in ( select icustays.icustay_id
from icustays where icustays.hadm_id in ( select
admissions.hadm_id from admissions where
admissions.subject_id = naproxen ) ) and
inputevents_cv.itemid in ( select d_items.itemid from
d_items where d_items.label = 'niroxen'and d_items.linksto
= 'inputevents_cv')

Incorrectly generated
and refused

how is naproxen taken?

Figure 8: Distribution of entropy values generated from T5.

I

Author statement

The authors of this paper bear all responsibility in case of violation of rights, etc. associated with the
EHRSQL dataset.

34

